# Lookahead Optimizer: k Steps Forward, 1 Step Back

**Authors**: Zhang, Lucas, Hinton, Ba
**Year**: 2019
**arXiv**: 1907.08610
**Topic**: optimization
**Relevance**: Lookahead wrapper for improved optimizer stability

---


--- Page 1 ---
Lookahead Optimizer: k steps forward, 1 step back
Michael R. Zhang, James Lucas, Geoffrey Hinton, Jimmy Ba
Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Vector Institute
{michael, jlucas, hinton,jba}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
The vast majority of successful deep neural networks are trained using variants of
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) algorithms. Recent attempts to improve SGD
can be broadly categorized into two approaches: (1) adaptive learning rate schemes,
such as AdaGrad and Adam, and (2) accelerated schemes, such as heavy-ball and
Nesterov momentum. In this paper, we propose a new optimization algorithm,
Lookahead, that is orthogonal to these previous approaches and iteratively updates
two sets of weights. Intuitively, the algorithm chooses a search direction by looking
ahead at the sequence of “fast weights" generated by another optimizer. We
show that Lookahead improves the learning stability and lowers the variance of
its inner optimizer with negligible computation and memory cost. We empirically
demonstrate Lookahead can signiﬁcantly improve the performance of SGD and
Adam, even with their default hyperparameter settings on ImageNet, CIFAR-
10/100, neural machine translation, and Penn Treebank.
1
Introduction
Despite their simplicity, SGD-like algorithms remain competitive for neural network training against
advanced second-order optimization methods. Large-scale distributed optimization algorithms
[10, 45] have shown impressive performance in combination with improved learning rate scheduling
schemes [42, 35], yet variants of SGD remain the core algorithm in the distributed systems. The
recent improvements to SGD can be broadly categorized into two approaches: (1) adaptive learning
rate schemes, such as AdaGrad [7] and Adam [18], and (2) accelerated schemes, such as Polyak
heavy-ball [33] and Nesterov momentum [29]. Both approaches make use of the accumulated past
gradient information to achieve faster convergence. However, to obtain their improved performance
in neural networks often requires costly hyperparameter tuning [28].
In this work, we present Lookahead, a new optimization method, that is orthogonal to these previous
approaches. Lookahead ﬁrst updates the “fast weights” [12] k times using any standard optimizer in
its inner loop before updating the “slow weights” once in the direction of the ﬁnal fast weights. We
show that this update reduces the variance. We ﬁnd that Lookahead is less sensitive to suboptimal
hyperparameters and therefore lessens the need for extensive hyperparameter tuning. By using
Lookahead with inner optimizers such as SGD or Adam, we achieve faster convergence across
different deep learning tasks with minimal computational overhead.
Empirically, we evaluate Lookahead by training classiﬁers on the CIFAR [19] and ImageNet datasets
[5], observing faster convergence on the ResNet-50 and ResNet-152 architectures [11]. We also
trained LSTM language models on the Penn Treebank dataset [24] and Transformer-based [42]
neural machine translation models on the WMT 2014 English-to-German dataset. For all tasks, using
Lookahead leads to improved convergence over the inner optimizer and often improved generalization
performance while being robust to hyperparameter changes. Our experiments demonstrate that
Lookahead is robust to changes in the inner loop optimizer, the number of fast weight updates, and
the slow weights learning rate.
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.
arXiv:1907.08610v2  [cs.LG]  3 Dec 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Algorithm 1 Lookahead Optimizer:
Require: Initial parameters φ0, objective function L
Require: Synchronization period k, slow weights step
size α, optimizer A
for t = 1, 2, . . . do
Synchronize parameters θt,0 ←φt−1
for i = 1, 2, . . . , k do
sample minibatch of data d ∼D
θt,i ←θt,i−1 + A(L, θt,i−1, d)
end for
Perform outer update φt ←φt−1 +α(θt,k −φt−1)
end for
return parameters φ
Figure 1: (Left) Visualizing Lookahead (k = 10) through a ResNet-32 test accuracy surface at epoch
100 on CIFAR-100. We project the weights onto a plane deﬁned by the ﬁrst, middle, and last fast
(inner-loop) weights. The fast weights are along the blue dashed path. All points that lie on the plane
are represented as solid, including the entire Lookahead slow weights path (in purple). Lookahead
(middle, bottom right) quickly progresses closer to the minima than SGD (middle, top right) is able
to. (Right) Pseudocode for Lookahead.
2
Method
In this section, we describe the Lookahead algorithm and discuss its properties. Lookahead maintains
a set of slow weights φ and fast weights θ, which get synced with the fast weights every k updates.
The fast weights are updated through applying A, any standard optimization algorithm, to batches of
training examples sampled from the dataset D. After k inner optimizer updates using A, the slow
weights are updated towards the fast weights by linearly interpolating in weight space, θ −φ. We
denote the slow weights learning rate as α. After each slow weights update, the fast weights are reset
to the current slow weights value. Psuedocode is provided in Algorithm 1.1
Standard optimization methods typically require carefully tuned learning rates to prevent oscillation
and slow convergence. This is even more important in the stochastic setting [25, 43]. Lookahead,
however, beneﬁts from a larger learning rate in the inner loop. When oscillating in the high curvature
directions, the fast weights updates make rapid progress along the low curvature directions. The slow
weights help smooth out the oscillations through the parameter interpolation. The combination of
fast weights and slow weights improves learning in high curvature directions, reduces variance, and
enables Lookahead to converge rapidly in practice.
Figure 1 shows the trajectory of both the fast weights and slow weights during the optimization of a
ResNet-32 model on CIFAR-100. While the fast weights explore around the minima, the slow weight
update pushes Lookahead aggressively towards an area of improved test accuracy, a region which
remains unexplored by SGD after 20 updates.
Slow weights trajectory
We can characterize the trajectory of the slow weights as an exponential
moving average (EMA) of the ﬁnal fast weights within each inner-loop, regardless of the inner
optimizer. After k inner-loop steps we have:
φt+1 = φt + α(θt,k −φt)
(1)
= α[θt,k + (1 −α)θt−1,k + . . . + (1 −α)t−1θ0,k] + (1 −α)tφ0
(2)
Intuitively, the slow weights heavily utilize recent proposals from the fast weight optimization but
maintain some inﬂuence from previous fast weights. We show that this has the effect of reducing
variance in Section 3.1. While a Polyak-style average has further theoretical guarantees, our results
match the claim that “an exponentially-decayed moving average typically works much better in
practice" [25].
1Our open source implementation is available at https://github.com/michaelrzhang/lookahead.
2

--- Page 3 ---
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Epoch
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Train Loss
CIFAR-10 Training Loss with Different Alpha Schedules (Adam with LR 0.001)
Standard Adam
Lookahead ( =0.5)
Adaptive Lookahead (
low = 0.5)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Train Loss
CIFAR-10 Training Loss with Different Alpha Schedules (Adam with LR 0.003)
Standard Adam
Lookahead ( =0.5)
Adaptive Lookahead (
low = 0.5)
Figure 2: CIFAR-10 training loss with ﬁxed and adaptive α. The adaptive α is clipped between
[αlow, 1]. (Left) Adam learning rate = 0.001. (Right) Adam learning rate = 0.003.
Fast weights trajectory
Within each inner-loop, the trajectory of the fast weights depends on the
choice of underlying optimizer. Given an optimization algorithm A that takes in an objective function
L and the current mini-batch training examples d, we have the update rule for the fast weights:
θt,i+1 = θt,i + A(L, θt,i−1, d).
(3)
We have the choice of maintaining, interpolating, or resetting the internal state (e.g. momentum) of
the inner optimizer. We evaluate this tradeoff on the CIFAR dataset (where every choice improves
convergence) in Appendix D.1 and maintain internal state for the other experiments.
Computational complexity
Lookahead has a constant computational overhead due to parameter
copying and basic arithmetic operations that is amortized across the k inner loop updates. The number
of operations is O( k+1
k ) times that of the inner optimizer. Lookahead maintains a single additional
copy of the number of learnable parameters in the model.
2.1
Selecting the Slow Weights Step Size
The step size in the direction (θt,k −θt,0) is controlled by α. By taking a quadratic approximation of
the loss, we present a principled way of selecting α.
Proposition 1 (Optimal slow weights step size). For a quadratic loss function L(x) = 1
2xT Ax−bT x,
the step size α∗that minimizes the loss for two points θt,0 and θt,k is given by:
α∗= arg min
α L(θt,0 + α(θt,k −θt,0)) = (θt,0 −θ∗)T A(θt,0 −θt,k)
(θt,0 −θt,k)T A(θt,0 −θt,k)
where θ∗= A−1b minimizes the loss.
Proof is in the appendix. Using quadratic approximations for the curvature, which is typical in second
order optimization [7, 18, 26], we can derive an estimate for the optimal α more generally. The
full Hessian is typically intractable so we instead use aforementioned approximations, such as the
diagonal approximation to the empirical Fisher used by the Adam optimizer [18]. This approximation
works well in our numerical experiments if we clip the magnitude of the step size. At each slow
weight update, we compute:
ˆα∗= clip((θt,0 −(θt,k −ˆA−1 ˆ∇L(θt,k))T ˆA(θt,0 −θt,k)
(θt,0 −θt,k)T ˆA(θt,0 −θt,k)
, αlow, 1)
where ˆA is the empirical Fisher approximation and θt,k −ˆA−1 ˆ∇L(θt,k) approximates the optimum
θ∗. We prove Proposition 1 and elaborate on assumptions in the appendix B.2. Setting αlow > 0
improves the stability of our algorithm. We evaluate the performance of this adaptive scheme versus
a ﬁxed scheme and standard Adam on a ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-10 with two different learning
rates and show the results in Figure 2. Additional hyperparameter details are given in appendix C.
Both the ﬁxed and adaptive Lookahead offer improved convergence.
In practice, a ﬁxed choice of α offers similar convergence beneﬁts and tends to generalize better.
Fixing α avoids the need to maintain an estimate of the empirical Fisher, which incurs a memory and
computational cost when the inner optimizer does not maintain such an estimate e.g. SGD. We thus
use a ﬁxed α for the rest of our deep learning experiments.
3

--- Page 4 ---
3
Convergence Analysis
3.1
Noisy quadratic analysis
Figure 3:
Comparing expected optimization
progress between SGD and Lookahead(k = 5)
on the noisy quadratic model. Each vertical slice
compares the convergence of optimizers with the
same ﬁnal loss values. For Lookahead, conver-
gence rates for 100 evenly spaced α values in the
range (0, 1] are overlaid.
We analyze Lookahead on a noisy quadratic
model to better understand its convergence guar-
antees. While simple, this model is a proxy for
neural network optimization and effectively op-
timizing it remains a challenging open problem
[37, 26, 43, 47]. In this section, we will show
under equal learning rates that Lookahead will
converge to a smaller steady-state risk than SGD.
We will then show through simulation of the ex-
pected dynamics that Lookahead is able to con-
verge to this steady-state risk more quickly than
SGD for a range of hyperparameter settings.
Model deﬁnition
We use the same model as
in Schaul et al. [37] and Wu et al. [43].
ˆL(x) = 1
2(x −c)T A(x −c),
(4)
with c ∼N(x∗, Σ). We assume that both A and Σ are diagonal and that, without loss of generality,
x∗= 0. While it is trivial to assume that A is diagonal 2 the co-diagonalizable noise assumption is
non-trivial but is common — see Wu et al. [43] and Zhang et al. [47] for further discussion. We use
ai and σ2
i to denote the diagonal elements of A and Σ respectively. Taking the expectation over c,
the expected loss of the iterates θ(t) is,
L(θ(t)) = E[ ˆL(θ(t))] = 1
2 E[
X
i
ai(θ(t)
i
2 + σ2
i )] = 1
2
X
i
ai(E[θ(t)
i ]2 + V[θ(t)
i ] + σ2
i ).
(5)
Analyzing the expected dynamics of the SGD iterates and the slow weights gives the following result.
Proposition 2 (Lookahead steady-state risk). Let 0 < γ < 2/L be the learning rate of SGD and
Lookahead where L = maxi ai. In the noisy quadratic model, the iterates of SGD and Lookahead
with SGD as its inner optimizer converge to 0 in expectation and the variances converge to the
following ﬁxed points:
V ∗
SGD =
γ2A2Σ2
I −(I −γA)2
(6)
V ∗
LA =
α2(I −(I −γA)2k)
α2(I −(I −γA)2k) + 2α(1 −α)(I −(I −γA)k)V ∗
SGD
(7)
Remarks
For the Lookahead variance ﬁxed point, the ﬁrst product term is always smaller than 1
for α ∈(0, 1), and thus Lookahead has a variance ﬁxed point that is strictly smaller than that of the
SGD inner-loop optimizer for the same learning rate. Evidence of this phenomenon is present in deep
neural networks trained on the CIFAR dataset, shown in Figure 10.
In Proposition 2, we use the same learning rate for both SGD and Lookahead. To fairly evaluate the
convergence of the two methods, we compare the convergence rates under hyperparameter settings
that achieve the same steady-state risk. In Figure 3 we show the expected loss after 1000 updates
(computed analytically) for both Lookahead and SGD. This shows that there exists (ﬁxed) settings
of the Lookahead hyperparameters that arrive at the same steady state risk as SGD but do so more
quickly. Moreover, Lookahead outperforms SGD across the broad spectrum of α values we simulated.
Details, further simulation results, and additional discussion are presented in Appendix B.
2Classical momentum’s iterates are invariant to translations and rotations (see e.g. Sutskever et al. [41]) and
Lookahead’s linear interpolation is also invariant to such changes.
4

--- Page 5 ---
3.2
Deterministic quadratic convergence
In the previous section we showed that on the noisy quadratic model, Lookahead is able to improve
convergence of the SGD optimizer under setting with equivalent convergent risk. Here we analyze
the quadratic model without noise using gradient descent with momentum [33, 9] and show that when
the system is under-damped, Lookahead is able to improve on the convergence rate.
As before, we restrict our attention to diagonal quadratic functions (which in this case is entirely
without loss of generality). Given an initial point θ0, we wish to ﬁnd the rate of contraction, that is,
the smallest ρ satisfying ||θt −θ∗|| ≤ρt||θ0 −θ∗||. We follow the approach of [31] and model the
optimization of this function as a linear dynamical system allowing us to compute the rate exactly.
Details are in Appendix B.
Figure 4: Quadratic convergence rates (1 −ρ) of classical
momentum versus Lookahead wrapping classical momentum.
For Lookahead, we ﬁx k = 20 lookahead steps and α =
0.5 for the slow weights step size. Lookahead is able to
signiﬁcantly improve on the convergence rate in the under-
damped regime where oscillations are observed.
As in Lucas et al. [23], to better un-
derstand the sensitivity of Lookahead
to misspeciﬁed conditioning we ﬁx
the momentum coefﬁcient of classi-
cal momentum and explore the con-
vergence rate over varying condition
number under the optimal learning
rate.
As expected, Lookahead has
slightly worse convergence in the
over-damped regime where momen-
tum is set too low and CM is slowly,
monotonically converging to the op-
timum. However, when the system
is under-damped (and oscillations oc-
cur) Lookahead is able to signiﬁcantly
improve the convergence rate by skip-
ping to a better parameter setting during oscillation.
4
Related work
Our work is inspired by recent advances in understanding the loss surface of deep neural networks.
While the idea of following the trajectory of weights dates back to Ruppert [36], Polyak and Juditsky
[34], averaging weights in neural networks has not been carefully studied until more recently. Garipov
et al. [8] observe that the ﬁnal weights of two independently trained neural networks can be connected
by a curve with low loss. Izmailov et al. [14] proposes Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA), which
averages the weights at different checkpoints obtained during training. Parameter averaging schemes
are used to create ensembles in natural language processing tasks [15, 27] and in training Generative
Adversarial Networks [44]. In contrast to previous approaches, which generally focus on generating
a set of parameters at the end of training, Lookahead is an optimization algorithm which performs
parameter averaging during the training procedure to achieve faster convergence. We elaborate on
differences with SWA and present additional experimental results in appendix D.3.
The Reptile algorithm, proposed by Nichol et al. [30], samples tasks in its outer loop and runs an
optimization algorithm on each task within the inner loop. The initial weights are then updated in the
direction of the new weights. While the functionality is similar, the application and setting are starkly
different. Reptile samples different tasks and aims to ﬁnd parameters which act as good initial values
for new tasks sampled at test time. Lookahead does not sample new tasks for each outer loop and
aims to take advantage of the geometry of loss surfaces to improve convergence.
Katyusha [1], an accelerated form of SVRG [17], also uses an outer and inner loop during optimization.
Katyusha checkpoints parameters during optimization. Within each inner loop step, the parameters
are pulled back towards the latest checkpoint. Lookahead computes the pullback only at the end
of the inner loop and the gradient updates do not utilize the SVRG correction (though this would
be possible). While Katyusha has theoretical guarantees in the convex optimization setting, the
SVRG-based update does not work well for neural networks [4].
Anderson acceleration [2] and other related extrapolation techniques [3] have a similar ﬂavor to
Lookahead. These methods keep track of all iterates within an inner loop and then compute some
linear combination which extrapolates the iterates towards their ﬁxed point. This presents additional
5

--- Page 6 ---
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epoch
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Train Loss
CIFAR-10 Train Loss
Lookahead
SGD
Adam
Polyak
OPTIMIZER
CIFAR-10
CIFAR-100
SGD
95.23 ± .19
78.24 ± .18
POLYAK
95.26 ± .04
77.99 ± .42
ADAM
94.84 ± .16
76.88 ± .39
LOOKAHEAD
95.27 ± .06
78.34 ± .05
Table 1: CIFAR Final Validation Accuracy.
Figure 5: Performance comparison of the different optimization algorithms. (Left) Train Loss on
CIFAR-100. (Right) CIFAR ResNet-18 validation accuracies with various optimizers. We do a grid
search over learning rate and weight decay on the other optimizers (details in appendix C). Lookahead
and Polyak are wrapped around SGD.
challenges ﬁrst in the form of additional memory overhead as the number of inner-loop steps increases
and also in ﬁnding the best linear combination. Scieur et al. [38, 39] propose a method by which to
ﬁnd a good linear combination and apply this approach to deep learning problems and report both
improved convergence and generalization. However, their method requires on the order of k times
more memory than Lookahead. Lookahead can be seen as a simple version of Anderson acceleration
wherein only the ﬁrst and last iterates are used.
5
Experiments
We completed a thorough evaluation of the Lookahead optimizer on a variety of deep learning tasks
against well-calibrated baselines. We explored image classiﬁcation on CIFAR-10/CIFAR-100 [19]
and ImageNet [5]. We also trained LSTM language models on the Penn Treebank dataset [24] and
Transformer-based [42] neural machine translation models on the WMT 2014 English-to-German
dataset. For all of our experiments, every algorithm consumed the same amount of training data.
5.1
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
The CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets for classiﬁcation consist of 32 × 32 color images, with
10 and 100 different classes, split into a training set with 50,000 images and a test set with 10,000
images. We ran all our CIFAR experiments with 3 seeds and trained for 200 epochs on a ResNet-18
[11] with batches of 128 images and decay the learning rate by a factor of 5 at the 60th, 120th, and
160th epochs. Additional details are given in appendix C.
We summarize our results in Figure 5.3 We also elaborate on how Lookahead contrasts with SWA and
present results demonstrating lower validation error with Pre-ResNet-110 and Wide-ResNet-28-10
[46] on CIFAR-100 in appendix D.3. Note that Lookahead achieves signiﬁcantly faster convergence
throughout training even though the learning rate schedule is optimized for the inner optimizer—
future work can involve building a learning rate schedule for Lookahead. This improved convergence
is important for better anytime performance in new datasets where hyperparameters and learning rate
schedules are not well-calibrated.
5.2
ImageNet
The 1000-way ImageNet task [5] is a classiﬁcation task that contains roughly 1.28 million training
images and 50,000 validation images. We use the ofﬁcial PyTorch implementation4 and the ResNet-
50 and ResNet-152 [11] architectures. Our baseline algorithm is SGD with an initial learning rate of
0.1 and momentum value of 0.9. We train for 90 epochs and decay our learning rate by a factor of 10
at the 30th and 60th epochs. For Lookahead, we set k = 5 and slow weights step size α = 0.5.
Motivated by the improved convergence we observed in our initial experiment, we tried a more
aggressive learning rate decay schedule where we decay the learning rate by a factor of 10 at the 30th,
48th, and 58th epochs. Using such a schedule, we reach 75% single crop top-1 accuracy on ImageNet
in just 50 epochs and reach 75.5% top-1 accuracy in 60 epochs. The results are shown in Figure 6.
3We refer to SGD with heavy ball momentum [33] as SGD.
4Implementation available at https://github.com/pytorch/examples/tree/master/imagenet.
6

--- Page 7 ---
OPTIMIZER
LA
SGD
EPOCH 50 - TOP 1
75.13
74.43
EPOCH 50 - TOP 5
92.22
92.15
EPOCH 60 - TOP 1
75.49
75.15
EPOCH 60 - TOP 5
92.53
92.56
Table 2: Top-1 and Top-5 single crop validation
accuracies on ImageNet.
Figure 6: ImageNet training loss. The asterisk denotes the aggressive learning rate decay schedule,
where LR is decayed at iteration 30, 48, and 58. We report validation accuracies for this schedule.
(a) Training perplexity of LSTM models trained
on the Penn Treebank dataset
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Inner Loop (Fast Weights) Steps
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
Training Loss
Adam + warmup
AdaFactor
Lookahead + Adam + warmup
Lookahead + Adam
(b) Training Loss on Transformer.
Adam and
AdaFactor both use a linear warmup scheme de-
scribed in Vaswani et al. [42].
Figure 7: Optimization performance on Penn Treebank and WMT-14 machine translation task.
To test the scalability of our method, we ran Lookahead with the aggressive learning rate decay on
ResNet-152. We reach 77% single crop top-1 accuracy in 49 epochs (matching what is reported in He
et al. [11]) and 77.96% top-1 accuracy in 60 epochs. Other approaches for improving convergence on
ImageNet can require hundreds of GPUs, or tricks such as ramping up the learning rate and adaptive
batch-sizes [10, 16]. The fastest convergence we are aware of uses an approximate second-order
method to train a ResNet-50 to 75% top-1 accuracy in 35 epochs with 1,024 GPUs [32]. In contrast,
Lookahead requires changing one single line of code and can easily scale to ResNet-152.
5.3
Language modeling
We trained LSTMs [13] for language modeling on the Penn Treebank dataset. We followed the
model setup of Merity et al. [27] and made use of their publicly available code in our experiments.
We did not include the ﬁne-tuning stages. We searched over hyperparameters for both Adam and
SGD (without momentum) to ﬁnd the model which gave the best validation performance. We then
performed an additional small grid search on each of these methods with Lookahead. Each model
was trained for 750 epochs. We show training curves for each model in Figure 7a.
Using Lookahead with Adam we were able to achieve the fastest convergence and best training,
validation, and test perplexity. The models trained with SGD took much longer to converge (around
700 epochs) and were unable to match the ﬁnal performance of Adam. Using Polyak weight averaging
[34] with SGD, as suggested by Merity et al. [27] and referred to as ASGD, we were able to improve
on the performance of Adam but were unable to match the performance of Lookahead. Full results
are given in Table 3 and additional details are in appendix C.
5.4
Neural machine translation
We trained Transformer based models [42] on the WMT2014 English-to-German translation task on
a single Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) node. We took the base model from Vaswani et al. [42] and
trained it using the proposed warmup-then-decay learning rate scheduling scheme and, additionally,
the same scheme wrapped with Lookahead. We found Lookahead speedups the early stage of the
training over Adam and the later proposed AdaFactor [40] optimizer. All the methods converge to
similar training loss and BLEU score at the end, see Figure 7b and Table 4.
7

--- Page 8 ---
Table 3: LSTM training, validation, and test per-
plexity on the Penn Treebank dataset.
OPTIMIZER
TRAIN
VAL.
TEST
SGD
43.62
66.0
63.90
LA(SGD)
35.02
65.10
63.04
ADAM
33.54
61.64
59.33
LA(ADAM)
31.92
60.28
57.72
POLYAK
-
61.18
58.79
Table 4: Transformer Base Model trained for
50k steps on WMT English-to-German. “Adam-”
denote Adam without learning rate warm-up.
OPTIMIZER
NEWSTEST13
NEWSTEST14
ADAM
24.6
24.6
LA(ADAM)
24.68
24.70
LA(ADAM-)
24.3
24.4
ADAFACTOR
24.17
24.51
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Train Loss
Evaluation of Inner Optimizer Learning Rates (CIFAR-10)
Lookahead (0.3)
SGD (0.3)
Lookahead (0.2)
SGD (0.2)
Lookahead (0.1)
SGD (0.1)
(a) CIFAR-10 Train Loss: Different LR
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Train Loss
Evaluation of Inner Optimizer Momentum (CIFAR-10)
Lookahead (0.95)
SGD (0.95)
Lookahead (0.98)
SGD (0.98)
Lookahead (0.9)
SGD (0.9)
(b) CIFAR-10 Train Loss: Different momentum
Figure 8: We ﬁx Lookahead parameters and evaluate on different inner optimizers.
Our NMT experiments further conﬁrms Lookahead improves the robustness of the inner loop
optimizer. We found Lookahead enables a wider range of learning rate {0.02, 0.04, 0.06} choices for
the Transformer model that all converge to similar ﬁnal losses. Full details are given in Appendix C.4.
5.5
Empirical analysis
Robustness to inner optimization algorithm, k, and α
We demonstrate empirically on the CIFAR
dataset that Lookahead consistently delivers fast convergence across different hyperparameter settings.
We ﬁx slow weights step size α = 0.5 and k = 5 and run Lookahead on inner SGD optimizers with
different learning rates and momentum; results are shown in Figure 8. In general, we observe that
Lookahead can train with higher learning rates on the base optimizer with little to no tuning on k and
α. This agrees with our discussion of variance reduction in Section 3.1. We also evaluate robustness
to the Lookahead hyperparameters by ﬁxing the inner optimizer and evaluating runs with varying
updates k and step size α; these results are shown in Figure 9.
Inner loop and outer loop evaluation
To get a better understanding of the Lookahead update, we
also plotted the test accuracy for every update on epoch 65 in Figure 10. We found that within each
inner loop the fast weights may lead to substantial degradation in task performance—this reﬂects
our analysis of the higher variance of the inner loop update in section 3.1. The slow weights step
recovers the outer loop variance and restores the test accuracy.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Train Loss
Train Loss on CIFAR-100
SGD Baseline
=0.5, k=5
=0.8, k=5
=0.5, k=10
=0.8, k=10
K
α
0.5
0.8
5
78.24 ± .02
78.27 ± .04
10
78.19 ± .22
77.94 ± .22
Table 5: All settings have higher validation accu-
racy than SGD (77.72%)
Figure 9: CIFAR-100 train loss and ﬁnal test accuracy with various k and α.
8

--- Page 9 ---
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Fast weight updates
0.924
0.926
0.928
0.930
0.932
0.934
0.936
0.938
Test accuracy
Per Update Test Accuracy on Epoch 65
Fast weights
Slow weights
Figure 10: Visualizing Lookahead accuracy for 60 fast weight updates. We plot the test accuracy
after every update (the training accuracy and loss behave similarly). The inner loop update tends to
degrade both the training and test accuracy, while the interpolation recovers the original performance.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we present Lookahead, an algorithm that can be combined with any standard optimiza-
tion method. Our algorithm computes weight updates by looking ahead at the sequence of “fast
weights" generated by another optimizer. We illustrate how Lookahead improves convergence by
reducing variance and show strong empirical results on many deep learning benchmark datasets and
architectures.
9

--- Page 10 ---
Acknowledgements
We’d like to thank Roger Grosse, Guodong Zhang, Denny Wu, Silviu Pitis, David Madras, Jackson
Wang, Harris Chan, and Mufan Li for helpful comments on earlier versions of this work. We are also
thankful for the many helpful comments from anonymous reviewers.
References
[1] Zeyuan Allen-Zhu. Katyusha: The ﬁrst direct acceleration of stochastic gradient methods. In
Proceedings of the 49th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages
1200–1205. ACM, 2017.
[2] Donald G Anderson. Iterative procedures for nonlinear integral equations. Journal of the ACM
(JACM), 12(4):547–560, 1965.
[3] Claude Brezinski and M Redivo Zaglia. Extrapolation methods: theory and practice, volume 2.
Elsevier, 2013.
[4] Aaron Defazio and Léon Bottou. On the ineffectiveness of variance reduced optimization for
deep learning, 2018.
[5] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009.
IEEE Conference on, pages 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
[6] Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural
networks with cutout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.
[7] John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning
and stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(Jul):2121–2159, 2011.
[8] Timur Garipov, Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Dmitry P Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon
Wilson.
Loss surfaces, mode connectivity, and fast ensembling of dnns.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1802.10026, 2018.
[9] Gabriel Goh. Why momentum really works. Distill, 2017. doi: 10.23915/distill.00006. URL
http://distill.pub/2017/momentum.
[10] Priya Goyal, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Pieter Noordhuis, Lukasz Wesolowski, Aapo Kyrola,
Andrew Tulloch, Yangqing Jia, and Kaiming He. Accurate, large minibatch sgd: training
imagenet in 1 hour. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02677, 2017.
[11] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 770–778, 2016.
[12] Geoffrey E Hinton and David C Plaut. Using fast weights to deblur old memories. 1987.
[13] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
1735–1780, 1997.
[14] Pavel Izmailov, Dmitrii Podoprikhin, Timur Garipov, Dmitry Vetrov, and Andrew Gordon
Wilson. Averaging weights leads to wider optima and better generalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.05407, 2018.
[15] Sébastien Jean, Kyunghyun Cho, Roland Memisevic, and Yoshua Bengio. On using very large
target vocabulary for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.2007, 2014.
[16] Xianyan Jia, Shutao Song, Wei He, Yangzihao Wang, Haidong Rong, Feihu Zhou, Liqiang Xie,
Zhenyu Guo, Yuanzhou Yang, Liwei Yu, et al. Highly scalable deep learning training system
with mixed-precision: Training imagenet in four minutes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.11205,
2018.
[17] Rie Johnson and Tong Zhang. Accelerating stochastic gradient descent using predictive variance
reduction. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 315–323, 2013.
10

--- Page 11 ---
[18] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[19] Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report,
Citeseer, 2009.
[20] Laurent Lessard, Benjamin Recht, and Andrew Packard. Analysis and design of optimization
algorithms via integral quadratic constraints. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 26(1):57–95,
2016.
[21] Ren-cang Li.
Sharpness in rates of convergence for cg and symmetric lanczos methods.
Technical report, 2005.
[22] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Fixing weight decay regularization in adam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[23] James Lucas, Richard Zemel, and Roger Grosse. Aggregated momentum: Stability through
passive damping. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.00325, 2018.
[24] Mitchell P Marcus, Mary Ann Marcinkiewicz, and Beatrice Santorini. Building a large annotated
corpus of english: The penn treebank. Computational linguistics, 19(2):313–330, 1993.
[25] James Martens. New insights and perspectives on the natural gradient method. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.1193, 2014.
[26] James Martens and Roger Grosse. Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored ap-
proximate curvature. In International conference on machine learning, pages 2408–2417,
2015.
[27] Stephen Merity, Nitish Shirish Keskar, and Richard Socher. Regularizing and optimizing lstm
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02182, 2017.
[28] Grégoire Montavon, Geneviève Orr, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Neural networks: tricks of the
trade, volume 7700. springer, 2012.
[29] Yurii E Nesterov. A method for solving the convex programming problem with convergence
rate o (1/kˆ 2). In Dokl. akad. nauk Sssr, volume 269, pages 543–547, 1983.
[30] Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. Reptile: a scalable metalearning algorithm.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02999, 2018.
[31] Brendan O’Donoghue and Emmanuel Candes. Adaptive restart for accelerated gradient schemes.
Foundations of computational mathematics, 15(3):715–732, 2015.
[32] Kazuki Osawa, Yohei Tsuji, Yuichiro Ueno, Akira Naruse, Rio Yokota, and Satoshi Matsuoka.
Second-order optimization method for large mini-batch: Training resnet-50 on imagenet in 35
epochs, 2018.
[33] Boris T Polyak. Some methods of speeding up the convergence of iteration methods. USSR
Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, 4(5):1–17, 1964.
[34] Boris T Polyak and Anatoli B Juditsky. Acceleration of stochastic approximation by averaging.
SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 30(4):838–855, 1992.
[35] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language
understanding by generative pre-training. URL https://s3-us-west-2. amazonaws. com/openai-
assets/research-covers/languageunsupervised/language understanding paper. pdf, 2018.
[36] David Ruppert. Efﬁcient estimations from a slowly convergent robbins-monro process. Techni-
cal report, Cornell University Operations Research and Industrial Engineering, 1988.
[37] Tom Schaul, Sixin Zhang, and Yann LeCun. No more pesky learning rates. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 343–351, 2013.
[38] Damien Scieur, Edouard Oyallon, Alexandre d’Aspremont, and Francis Bach. Nonlinear
acceleration of deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09639, 2018.
11

--- Page 12 ---
[39] Damien Scieur, Edouard Oyallon, Alexandre d’Aspremont, and Francis Bach. Nonlinear
acceleration of cnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00370, 2018.
[40] Noam Shazeer and Mitchell Stern. Adafactor: Adaptive learning rates with sublinear memory
cost. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04235, 2018.
[41] Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, George Dahl, and Geoffrey Hinton. On the importance of
initialization and momentum in deep learning. In International conference on machine learning,
pages 1139–1147, 2013.
[42] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, pages 5998–6008, 2017.
[43] Yuhuai Wu, Mengye Ren, Renjie Liao, and Roger Grosse. Understanding short-horizon bias in
stochastic meta-optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02021, 2018.
[44] Stefan Winkler Kim-Hui Yap Georgios Piliouras Vijay Chandrasekhar Yasin Yazıcı, Chuan-
Sheng Foo.
The unusual effectiveness of averaging in gan training.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.04498, 2018.
[45] Yang You, Zhao Zhang, Cho-Jui Hsieh, James Demmel, and Kurt Keutzer. Imagenet training in
minutes. In Proceedings of the 47th International Conference on Parallel Processing, page 1.
ACM, 2018.
[46] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In BMVC, 2016.
[47] Guodong Zhang, Lala Li, Zachary Nado, James Martens, Sushant Sachdeva, George E Dahl,
Christopher J Shallue, and Roger Grosse. Which algorithmic choices matter at which batch
sizes? insights from a noisy quadratic model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04164, 2019.
12

--- Page 13 ---
A
Noisy quadratic analysis
Here we present the details of the noisy quadratic analysis, and the proof of Proposition 2.
Stochastic dynamics of SGD
From Wu et al. [43], we can compute the dynamics of SGD with
learning rate γ as follows:
E[x(t+1)] = (I −γA) E[x(t)]
(8)
V[x(t+1)] = (I −γA)2 V[x(t)] + γ2A2Σ
(9)
Stochastic dynamics of Lookahead SGD
We now compute the dynamics of the slow weights of
Lookahead.
Lemma 1. The Lookahead slow weights have the following trajectories:
E[φt+1] = [1 −α + α(I −γA)k] E[φt]
(10)
V[φt+1] = [1 −α + α(I −γA)k]2 V[φt] + α2
k−1
X
i=0
(I −γA)2iγ2A2Σ
(11)
Proof. The expectation trajectory follows from SGD,
E[φt+1] = (1 −α) E[φt] + α E[θt,k]
= (1 −α) E[φt] + α(I −γA)k E[φt]
= [1 −α + α(I −γA)k] E[φt]
For the variance, we can write V[φt+1] = (1 −α)2 V[φt] + α2 V[θt,k] + 2α(1 −α)cov(φt, θt,k).
We proceed by computing the covariance term recursively. For simplicity, we work with a single
element, θ, of the vector θ (as A is diagonal, each element evolves independently).
cov(θt,k−1, θt,k) = E[(θt,k−1 −E[θt,k−1])(θt,k −E[θt,k])]
= E[(θt,k−1 −E[θt,k−1])(θt,k −(1 −γa) E[θt,k−1])]
= E[θt,k−1θt,k] −(1 −γa) E[θt,k−1]2
= E[(1 −γa)θ2
t,k−1] −(1 −γa) E[θt,k−1]2
= (1 −γa) V[θt,k−1]
A similar derivation yields cov(φt, θt,k) = (I −γA)k V[φt]. After substituting the SGD variance
formula and some rearranging we have,
V[φt+1] = [1 −α + α(I −γA)k]2 V[φt] + α2
k−1
X
i=0
(I −γA)2iγ2A2Σ
We now proceed with the proof of Proposition 2.
Proof. First note that if the learning rate is chosen as speciﬁed, then each of the trajectories is a
contraction map. By Banach’s ﬁxed point theorem, they each have a unique ﬁxed point. Clearly the
expectation trajectories contract to zero in each case.
For the variance we can solve for the ﬁxed points directly. For SGD,
V ∗
SGD = (1 −γA)2V ∗
SGD + γA2Σ,
⇒V ∗
SGD =
γ2A2Σ
I −(I −γA)2 .
13

--- Page 14 ---
For Lookahead, we have,
V ∗
LA = [1 −α + α(I −γA)k]2V ∗
LA + α2
k−1
X
i=0
(I −γA)2iγ2A2Σ
⇒V ∗
LA =
α2 Pk−1
i=0 (I −γA)2i
I −[(1 −α)I + α(I −γA)k]2 γ2A2Σ
⇒V ∗
LA =
α2(I −(I −γA)2k)
I −[(1 −α)I + α(I −γA)k]2
γ2A2Σ
I −(I −γA)2
where for the ﬁnal equality, we used the identity Pk
0 ai = (1 −ak)/(1 −a). Some standard
manipulations of the denominator on the ﬁrst term lead to the ﬁnal solution,
V ∗
LA =
α2(I −(I −γA)2k)
α2(I −(I −γA)2k) + 2α(1 −α)(I −(I −γA)k)
γ2A2Σ2
I −(I −γA)2
For the same learning rate, Lookahead will achieve a smaller loss as the variance is reduced more.
However, the convergence speed of the expectation term will be slower as we must compare 1 −
α + α(I −γA)k to (I −γA)k and the latter is always smaller for α < 1. In our experiments, we
observe that Lookahead typically converges much faster than its inner optimizer. We speculate that
the learning rate for the inner optimizer is set sufﬁciently high such that the variance reduction term
is more important–this is the more common regime for neural networks that attain high validation
accuracy, as higher initial learning rates are used to overcome the short-horizon bias [43].
A.1
Comparing convergence rates
In Figure 3 we compared the convergence rates of SGD and Lookahead. We speciﬁed the eigenvalues
of A according to the worst-case model from Li [21] (also used by Wu et al. [43]) and set Σ = A−1.
We computed the expected loss (Equation 5) for learning rates in the range (0, 1) for SGD and
Lookahead with α ∈(0, 1], with k = 5, at time T = 1000 (by unrolling the above dynamics). We
computed the variance ﬁxed point for each learning rate under each optimizer and use this value to
compute the optimal loss. Finally, we plot the difference between the expected loss at T and the ﬁnal
loss, as a function of the ﬁnal loss. This allows us to compare the convergence performance between
SGD and Lookahead optimization settings which converge to the same solution.
Further convergence plots
In Figure 11 we present additional plots comparing the convergence
performance between SGD and Lookahead. In (a) we show the convergence of Lookahead for a
single choice of α, where our method is able to outperform SGD even for this ﬁxed value. In (b) we
show the convergence after only a few updates. Here SGD outperforms Lookahead for some smaller
choices of α. This is because SGD is able to make progress on the expectation more rapidly and
reduces this part of the loss quickly — this is related to the short-horizon bias phenomenon [43].
However, even with only a few updates there are choices of α which are able to outperform SGD.
We also measured the optimal expected loss after some ﬁnite time horizon for both Lookahead and
SGD in Figure 12. We performed a ﬁne-grained grid search over the learning rate for SGD and
both the learning rate and α for Lookahead (keeping k = 5 ﬁxed). We evaluated 100 learning rates
equally spaced on a log-scale in the range [10−4, 10−1]. For Lookahead, we additionally evaluated
50 α values equally spaced on a log-scale in the range [10−4, 1]. For every time horizon, there exists
settings of Lookahead that outperform SGD.
B
Deterministic quadratic convergence analysis
Here we present additional details on the quadratic convergence analysis.
B.1
Lookahead as a dynamical system
As in the main text, we will assume that the optimum lies at θ∗= 0 for simplicity, but the argument
easily generalizes. Here we consider the more general case of a quadratic function f(x) = 1
2xT Ax.
We use η to denote the CM learning rate and β for it’s momentum coefﬁcient.
14

--- Page 15 ---
(a)
(b)
Figure 11: Convergence of SGD and Lookahead on the noisy quadratic model. (a): We show the
convergence of Lookahead with a single ﬁxed choice of α = 0.4. (b): We compare the early stage
performance of Lookahead to SGD over a range of α values.
200
400
600
800
1000
Steps (t)
50.00
50.25
50.50
50.75
51.00
51.25
51.50
51.75
52.00
Expected loss [Lt]
Expected Loss Over Finite Horizon
SGD
LA(SGD)
Figure 12: Expected loss of SGD and Lookahead with (constant-through-time) hyperparameters
tuned to be optimal at a ﬁnite time horizon. At each ﬁnite horizon (x-axis) we perform a grid search
to ﬁnd the best expected loss of each optimizer. Lookahead dominates SGD over all time horizons.
First we can stack together a full set of fast weights and write the following,


θt,0
θt−1,k
...
θt−1,1

= LB(k−1)T


θt−1,0
θt−2,k
...
θt−2,1


Here, L represents the Lookahead interpolation, B represents the update corresponding to classical
momentum in the inner-loop and T is a transition matrix which realigns the fast weight iterates.
Each of these matrices takes the following form,
L =


αI
0
· · ·
0
(1 −α)I
I
0
· · ·
· · ·
0
0
I
...
...
...
...
...
...
0
...
0
· · ·
0
I
0


15

--- Page 16 ---
B =


(1 + β)I −ηA
−βI
0
· · ·
0
I
0
· · ·
· · ·
0
0
I
...
...
...
...
...
...
0
...
0
· · ·
0
I
0


T =


I −ηA
βI
−βI
0
· · ·
0
I
0
· · ·
· · ·
0
...
0
I
...
· · ·
...
...
...
...
...
0
...
...
...
· · ·
0
I
0
0
0
· · ·
0
0
I
0


Each matrix consists of four blocks. The bottom left block is always an identity matrix that shifts
the iterates along one index. The bottom right column is all zeros with the top-right column being
non-zero only for L which applies the Lookahead interpolation. The top left row is used to apply the
Lookahead/CM updates in each matrix.
After computing the appropriate product of these matrices, we can use standard solvers to compute
the eigenvalues which bound the convergence of the linear dynamical system (see e.g. Lessard et al.
[20] for an exposition). Finally, note that because this linear dynamical systems corresponds to k
updates (or one slow-weight update) we must compute the kth root of the eigenvalues to recover the
correct convergence bound.
B.2
Optimal slow weight step size
We present the proof of Proposition 1 for the optimal slow weight step size α∗.
Proof. We compute the derivative with respect to α
∇αL(θt,0 + α(θt,k −θt,0)) = (θt,k −θt,0)T A(θt,0 + α(θt,k −θt,0)) −(θt,k −θt,0)T b
Setting the derivative to 0 and using b = Aθ∗:
α[(θt,k −θt,0)T A(θt,k −θt,0)] = (θt,k −θt,0)T A(θ∗−θt,0)
(12)
=⇒α∗= arg min
α L(θt,0 + α(θt,k −θt,0)) = (θt,0 −θ∗)T A(θt,0 −θt,k)
(θt,0 −θt,k)T A(θt,0 −θt,k)
(13)
We approximate the optimal θ∗= θt,k −ˆA−1 ˆ∇L(θt,k), since the Fisher can be viewed as an
approximation to the Hessian [25]. Stochastic gradients are computed on mini-batches used in
training so as to not incur additional computational cost. Because the algorithm with ﬁxed α performs
so well, we only did preliminary experiments with an adaptive α. We note that the approximation is
greedy and incorporating priors on noise and curvature is an interesting direction for future work.
C
Experimental setup
Here we present additional details on the experiments appearing in the main paper.
C.1
CIFAR-classiﬁcation
We run every experiment with three random seeds using the publicly available setup from [6].
A reviewer helpfully noted that this implementation of ResNet-18 has wider channels and more
parameters than the original. For future work, it would be better to follow the original ResNet
16

--- Page 17 ---
architecture for CIFAR classiﬁcation. However, we observed consistently better convergence with
Lookahead across different architectures and have results with other architectures in Appendix D.3.
Our plots show the mean value with error bars of one standard deviation. We use a standard training
procedure that is the same as that of Zagoruyko and Komodakis [46]. That is, images are zero-padded
with 4 pixels on each side and then a random 32 × 32 crop is extracted and mirrored horizontally
50% of the time. Inputs are normalized with per-channel means and standard deviations. Lookahead
is evaluated on the slow weights of its inner optimizer. To make this evaluation fair, we evaluate the
training loss at the end of each epoch by iterating through the training set again, without performing
any gradient updates.
We conduct hyperparameter searches over learning rates and weight decay values, making choices
based on ﬁnal validation performance. For SGD, we set the momentum to 0.9 and sweep over the
learning rates {0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and weight decay values of {0.0003, 0.001, 0.003}.
The best choice was a learning rate of 0.05 and weight decay of 0.001. We found AdamW [22] to
perform better than Adam and refer it to as Adam throughout our CIFAR experiment section. For
Adam, we do a grid search on learning rate of {1e-4, 3e-4, 1e-3, 3e-3, 1e-2} and weight decay values
of {0.1, 0.3, 1, 3}. The best choice was a learning rate of 3e-4 and weight decay of 1. For Polyak
averaging, we compute the moving average of SGD use the best weight decay from SGD and sweep
over the learning rates {0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5}. The best choice was a learning rate of 0.3.
For Lookahead, we set the inner optimizer SGD learning rate to 0.1 and do a grid search over
α = {0.2, 0.5, 0.8} and k = {5, 10}, with α = 0.8 and k = 5 performing best (though the choice is
fairly robust). We report the verison of Lookahead that resets momentum in our CIFAR experiments.
C.2
ImageNet
For the baseline algorithm, we used SGD with a heavy ball momentum of 0.9. We swept over learning
rates in the set: {0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and selected a learning rate of 0.1 because it had the
highest ﬁnal validation accuracy.
We directly wrapped Lookahead around the settings provided in the ofﬁcial PyTorch repository
repository with k = 5 and α = 0.5 (where SGD has a learning rate of 0.1 in the inner loop).
Observing the improved convergence of our algorithm, we tested Lookahead with the aggressive
learning rate decay schedule (decaying at the 30th, 48th, and 58th epochs). We run our experiments
on 4 Nvidia P100 GPUs with a batch size of 256 and weight decay of 1e-4. We used the same settings
in the ResNet-152 experiments.
C.3
Language modeling
For the language modeling task we used the model and code provided by Merity et al. [27]. We used
the default settings suggested in this codebase at the time of usage which we report here. The LSTM
we trained had 3 layers each containing 1150 hidden units. We used word embeddings of dimension
400. Within each hidden layer we apply dropout with probability 0.3 and the input embedding layers
use dropout with probability 0.65. We applied dropout to the embedding layer itself with probability
0.1. We used the weight drop method proposed in Merity et al. [27] with probability 0.5. We adopt the
regularization proposed in section 4.6 in Merity et al. [27]: RNN activations have L2 regularization
applied to them with a scaling of 2.0, and temporal activation regularization is applied with scaling
1.0. Finally, all weights receive a weight decay of 1.2e-6.
We trained the model using variable sequence lengths and batch sizes of 80. We apply gradient
clipping of 0.25 to all optimizers. During training, if validation loss has not decreased for 15 epochs
then we reduce the learning rate by half. Before applying Lookahead, we completed a grid search
over the Adam and SGD optimizers to ﬁnd competitive baseline models. For SGD we did not apply
momentum and searched learning rates in the range {50, 30, 10, 5, 2.5, 1, 0.1}. For Adam we kept
the default momentum values of (β1, β2) = (0.9, 0.999) and searched over learning rates in the
range {0.1, 0.05, 0.01, 0.005, 0.001, 0.0005, 0.0001}. We chose the best model by picking the model
which achieved the best validation performance at any point during training.
After picking the best SGD/Adam hyperparameters we trained the models again using Lookahead
with the best baseline optimizers for the inner-loop. We tried using k = {5, 10, 20} inner-loop
updates and α = {0.2, 0.5, 0.8} interpolation coefﬁcients. Once again, we reported Lookahead’s
ﬁnal performance by choosing the parameters which gave the best validation performance during
training.
17

--- Page 18 ---
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epoch
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
Train Loss
Inner Optimizer State Ablation
Maintain Momentum
Interpolate Momentum
Reset Momentum
SGD Baseline
OPTIMIZER
CIFAR-10
MAINTAIN
95.15 ± .08
INTERPOLATE
95.16 ± .13
RESET
94.91 ± .05
Table 6: CIFAR Final Validation Accuracy.
Figure 13: Evaluation of maintaining, interpolating, and resetting momentum on CIFAR-10
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epoch
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
Test Accuracy
CIFAR-10 Test Accuracy
Lookahead
SGD
Adam
Polyak
Figure 14: Evolution of test accuracy on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet.
For this task, α = 0.5 or α = 0.8 and k = 5 or k = 10 worked best. As in our other experiments, we
found that Lookahead was largely robust to different choices of k and α. We expect that we could
achieve even better results with Lookahead if we jointly optimized the hyperparameters of Lookahead
and the underlying optimizer.
C.4
Neural machine translation
For this task, we trained on a single TPU core that has 8 workers each with a minibatch size of
2048. We use the default hyperparameters for Adam [42] and AdaFactor [40] in the experiments.
For Lookahead, we did a minor grid search over the learning rate {0.02, 0.04, 0.06} and k = {5, 10}
while setting α = 0.5. We found learning rate 0.04 and k = 10 worked best. After we train those
models for 250k steps, they can all reach around 27 BLEU on Newstest2014 respectively.
D
Additional Experiments
D.1
Inner Optimizer State
Throughout our paper, we maintain the state of our inner optimizer for simplicity. For SGD with
heavy-ball momentum, this corresponds to preserving the momentum. Here, we present a sensitivity
study by comparing the convergence of Lookahead when maintaining the momentum, interpolating
the momentum, and resetting the momentum. All three improve convergence versus SGD.
D.2
Validation Accuracy
We present curves corresponding to the evolution of validation accuracy during training on CIFAR
and ImageNet datasets. Though not the focus of our work, we ﬁnd that faster convergence in training
loss does in fact correspond to better validation performance on these datasets.
D.3
Comparison to Stochastic Weight Averaging
In this subsection, we elaborate on differences between Stochastic Weight Averaging (SWA) [14] and
Lookahead, showing that they serve different purposes but can be complementary. First, SWA and
the general family of methods that perform tail averaging [36, 34] requires a choice of when to begin
averaging. A choice that is either too early or too late can be detrimental to performance. This is
illustrated in Figure 15, where we plot comparisons of the test accuracy of three runs of Lookahead
and SWA, using SGD in the inner loop of both algorithms. We use the suggested schedule from the
SWA paper, which has higher learning rates than is typical at the end of training. SWA achieves better
18

--- Page 19 ---
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Epoch
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Test Accuracy
WideResNet-28-10 CIFAR-100 Test Accuracy
SGD
LA(SGD)
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
Epoch
80.0
80.5
81.0
81.5
82.0
82.5
83.0
Test Accuracy
SWA WideResNet-28-10 CIFAR-100 Test Accuracy
SGD + SWA
LA(SGD) + SWA
Figure 16: Test Accuracy on CIFAR-100 with SWA and Lookahead (Wide ResNet-28-10). Following
Izmailov et al, SWA is started at epoch 161. We plot the accuracy throughout training (left) and the
accuracy of the SWA network (right).
performance when initialized from epoch 10 compared to epoch 1, due to poor performance from the
earlier models. In contrast, Lookahead is used from initialization and does not have this tail averaging
start decision. While SWA performs better during the intermediate stages of training (since it is
loosely approximating an ensemble by averaging the weights of multiple models), Lookahead with its
variance reduction properties achieves better ﬁnal performance, even with the modiﬁed learning rate
schedule. Lookahead also computes an exponential moving average of its fast weights rather than the
artithmetic average of SWA, which increases the emphasis on recent proposals of weights [25].
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Epoch
60.0
62.5
65.0
67.5
70.0
72.5
75.0
77.5
80.0
Test Accuracy
PreResNet-110 CIFAR-100 Test Accuracy
SWA (epoch 1)
SWA (epoch 10)
Lookahead
Figure 15: Test Accuracy on CIFAR-100 with SWA and
Lookahead (PreResNet-110). We follow exactly the hyperpa-
rameter settings in their repository and also run Lookahead
with α = 0.8 and k = 10. Note that the learning rate sched-
ule uses a learning rate that is higher than is typical at the
end of training.
We do believe that Lookahead is com-
plementary to SWA and traditional
techniques for ensembling models. To
this end, we perform three runs with
Wide ResNet-28-10 [46] on CIFAR-
100 with SWA and compare two
choices of the inner loop algorithm
of SWA. The inner loop algorithms
are SGD (as in [14]) and Lookahead
wrapped around SGD. The runs with
Lookahead achieve higher test accu-
racy throughout training and in the
weight averaged network.
19
