# Maximum Likelihood with Bias-Corrected Calibration is Hard-To-Beat at Label Shift Adaptation

**Authors**: Alexandari, Kundaje, Shrikumar
**Year**: 2020
**arXiv**: 1901.06852
**Topic**: calibration
**Relevance**: Bias-corrected calibration for shifted label distributions in imbalanced settings

---


--- Page 1 ---
Maximum Likelihood with Bias-Corrected Calibration is Hard-To-Beat at
Label Shift Adaptation
Amr M. Alexandari * 1 Anshul Kundaje 1 2 Avanti Shrikumar * 1
Abstract
Label shift refers to the phenomenon where the
prior class probability p(y) changes between the
training and test distributions, while the condi-
tional probability p(x|y) stays ﬁxed. Label shift
arises in settings like medical diagnosis, where a
classiﬁer trained to predict disease given symp-
toms must be adapted to scenarios where the base-
line prevalence of the disease is different. Given
estimates of p(y|x) from a predictive model,
Saerens et al. proposed an efﬁcient maximum
likelihood algorithm to correct for label shift that
does not require model retraining, but a limit-
ing assumption of this algorithm is that p(y|x)
is calibrated, which is not true of modern neural
networks. Recently, Black Box Shift Learning
(BBSL) and Regularized Learning under Label
Shifts (RLLS) have emerged as state-of-the-art
techniques to cope with label shift when a classi-
ﬁer does not output calibrated probabilities, but
both methods require model retraining with impor-
tance weights and neither has been benchmarked
against maximum likelihood. Here we (1) show
that combining maximum likelihood with a type
of calibration we call bias-corrected calibration
outperforms both BBSL and RLLS across diverse
datasets and distribution shifts, (2) prove that the
maximum likelihood objective is concave, and
(3) introduce a principled strategy for estimating
source-domain priors that improves robustness
to poor calibration. This work demonstrates that
the maximum likelihood with appropriate cali-
bration is a formidable and efﬁcient baseline for
label shift adaptation; notebooks reproducing ex-
periments available https://github.com/
kundajelab/labelshiftexperiments
*Equal contribution 1Department of Computer Science, Stan-
ford University 2Departments of Genetics, Stanford University.
Correspondence to: Anshul Kundaje <anshul@kundaje.net>,
Avanti Shrikumar <avanti.shrikumar@gmail.com>.
Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by
the author(s).
1. Introduction
Imagine we train a classiﬁer to predict whether or not a
person has a disease based on observed symptoms, and
the classiﬁer predicts reliably when deployed in the clinic.
Suppose that there is a sudden surge in cases of the disease.
During such an outbreak, the probability of persons having
the disease given that they show symptoms rises, but the
symptoms generated by the disease do not change. How
can we adapt the classiﬁer to cope with the difference in the
baseline prevalence of the disease?
Formally, let y denote our labels (e.g. whether or not a
person is diseased), and let x denote the observed symp-
toms. Let us denote the joint distribution (x, y) before the
outbreak (our “source” domain) using the letter P, and let
us denote the distribution during the outbreak (our “target”
domain, where we do not have labels) as Q. How can we
adapt a classiﬁer trained to estimate p(y|x) (the conditional
probability in distribution P) so that it can instead estimate
q(y|x) (the conditional probability in distribution Q)? Ab-
sent assumptions about the nature of the shift between P
and Q, this problem is intractable. However, if the disease
generates similar symptoms regardless of spread, we can
assume that p(x|y) = q(x|y), and that the shift in the joint
distribution q(x, y) is due to a shift in the label propor-
tion q(y). Formally, we assume that q(x, y) = p(x|y)q(y).
This is known as label shift or prior probability shift (Amos,
2008), and it corresponds to anti-causal learning (i.e. pre-
dicting the cause y from its effects x) (Schoelkopf et al.,
2012). Anti-causal learning is appropriate for diagnosing
diseases given observations of symptoms because diseases
cause symptoms.
Given estimates of p(y) and p(y|x), Saerens et al. (2002)
proposed a simple Expectation Maximization (EM) proce-
dure to estimate q(y) without needing to estimate p(x|y).
However, estimates of p(y|x) derived from modern neu-
ral networks are often poorly calibrated (Guo et al., 2017),
and the lack of calibration can decrease the effectiveness
of EM. As an alternative, Lipton et al. (2018) developed a
technique called Black Box Shift Learning (BBSL) that can
work even when the predictions p(y|x) are not calibrated.
Azizzadenesheli et al. (2019) further improved upon BBSL
in a technique known as Regularized Learning under Label
arXiv:1901.06852v5  [cs.LG]  27 Jun 2020

--- Page 2 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Shifts (RLLS). Both BBSL and RLLS leverage informa-
tion in a confusion matrix calculated on a held-out portion
of the training set. To our knowledge, neither BBSL nor
RLLS have been benchmarked against EM. Moreover, both
BBSL and RLLS require model retraining using importance
weighting, which does not work not as well as expected with
deep neural networks (Byrd and Lipton, 2019), and RLLS
also relies on a regularization hyperparameter. Conversely,
EM requires neither retraining nor hyperparameter tuning.
Although the EM approach is limited by the assumption that
the predictions p(y|x) are calibrated, a number of recent
techniques have been proposed to correct for miscalibration
of p(y|x) using a held-out portion of the training set (Guo
et al., 2017). The held-out set can be thought of as analogous
to the held-out set used in BBSL and RLLS to calculate a
confusion matrix. This suggests a simple yet novel hybrid
algorithm for adapting to label shift: ﬁrst, calibrate predic-
tions using the held-out training set, then perform domain
adaptation on the calibrated predictions using EM. In this
work, we studied the effectiveness of this hybrid algorithm.
More generally, we studied the impact of calibration on
domain adaptation to label shift.
1.1. Our Contributions
1. In experiments on MNIST, CIFAR10/CIFAR100, and
Diabetic Retinopathy Detection, we found that EM
achieves state-of-the-art results when used with an
appropriate type of calibration. Although BBSL and
RLLS both beneﬁt from calibration, they did not tend
to outperform EM when the probabilities were well-
calibrated.
2. We observed that the popular calibration approach of
Temperature Scaling (TS) (Guo et al., 2017) does not
tend to achieve the best results for adaptation to la-
bel shift, possibly owing to large systematic biases in
the calibrated probabilities (Fig. 1). Best results are
obtained with variants of TS containing class-speciﬁc
bias parameters that can correct for systematic bias.
3. We make two contributions to the algorithm for maxi-
mum likelihood label shift: ﬁrst, we identify a princi-
pled strategy for computing the source-domain priors
that improves robustness when the calibrated probabil-
ities have systematic bias. Second, we prove that the
likelihood function is concave and bounded; thus, the
EM algorithm converges to a global maximum, and
standard convex optimizers can be used as an alterna-
tive to EM.
2. Background
2.1. Temperature Scaling, Vector Scaling and Expected
Calibration Error
Calibration has a long history in the machine learning liter-
ature (DeGroot and Fienberg, 1983; Platt, 1999; Zadrozny
and Elkan; 2002; Niculescu-Mizil and Caruana, 2005;
Kuleshov and Liang, 2015; Naeini et al., 2015; Kuleshov
and Ermon, 2016). In the context of modern neural net-
works, Guo et al. (2017) showed that Temperature Scaling,
a single-parameter variant of Platt Scaling (Platt, 1999), was
effective at reducing miscalibration. Temperature scaling
performs calibration by introducing a temperature parameter
T to the logit vector of the softmax. Let z(xk) represent a
vector of the original softmax logits computed on input xk,
and let y be a random variable representing the label. With
temperature scaling, we have p(y = i|xk) =
ez(xk)i/T
P
j ez(xk)j /T ,
where T is optimized with respect to the Negative Log Like-
lihood (NLL) on a held-out portion of the training set, such
as the validation set. Guo et al. (2017) compared TS to an
approach deﬁned as Vector Scaling (VS), where a differ-
ent scaling parameter was used for each class along with
class-specﬁc bias parameters. Formally, in vector scaling,
p(y = i|xk) =
e(z(xk)iWi)+bi
P
j e(z(xk)j Wj )+bj . Guo et al. (2017) found
that vector scaling had a tendency to perform slightly worse
than TS as measured by a metric known as the Expected
Calibration Error (Naeini et al., 2015). To compute the
ECE, the predicted probabilities for the output class are
partitioned into M equally spaced bins, and the weighted
average of the difference between the bin’s accuracy and
the bin’s conﬁdence is computed, where the weights are
determined by the proportion of examples falling in the
bin. Formally, ECE = PM
m=1
|Bm|
n |acc(Bm) −conf(Bm)|,
where n is the number of samples.
2.2. Label Shift Adaptation via Maximum Likelihood
In a seminal paper on label shift adaptation, Saerens et al.
(2002) proposed an Expectation Maximization algorithm for
estimating the shift in the class priors between the training
and test distributions. Let ˆq(s)(y = i) denote the estimate
(from EM iteration s) of the prior probability q(y = i) of
observing class i in the test set. The algorithm proceeds as
follows: ﬁrst, ˆq(0)(y = i) is initialized to be equal to the
class priors ˆp(y = i) estimated from the training set. Then,
the conditional probabilities in the E-step are computed as
ˆq(s)(y = i|xk) =
ˆq(s)(y=i)
ˆ
p(y=i)
ˆp(y=i|xk)
Pm
j=1
ˆq(s)(y=j)
ˆ
p(y=j)
ˆp(y=j|xk), where m is the
number of output classes. Finally, the prior estimates in the
M-step are updated as ˆq(s+1)(y = i) =
1
N
PN
k=1 ˆq(s)(y =
i|xk), where N is the number of examples in the testing set.
The E and M steps are iterated until convergence. As there is

--- Page 3 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Figure 1. Temperature Scaling exhibits systematic bias. On CI-
FAR10 data, systematic bias was quantiﬁed by the JS divergence
between the true class label proportions and the average class pre-
dictions on a held-out test set drawn from the same distribution as
the dataset used for calibration. TS: Temperature Scaling, NBVS:
No-Bias Vector Scaling, BCTS: Bias-Corrected Temperature Scal-
ing, VS: Vector Scaling. BCTS and VS had signiﬁcantly lower
systematic bias compared to TS and NBVS. Results are averaged
over multiple models and dataset samples (Sec. 4.1).
no need to estimate p(x|y) in any step of the EM procedure,
the algorithm can scale to high-dimensional datasets, with a
runtime of O(mN) per iteration (independent of the input
dimensions). This procedure is motivated by the assumption
that ˆp(y = i|xk) is calibrated.
2.3. Label Shift Adaptation via BBSL & RLLS
Following the EM approach of Saerens et al. (2002), sev-
eral additional approaches for labels shift adaptation have
emerged (Chan and Ng; Storkey; Schoelkopf et al., 2012;
Zhang et al., 2013; Lipton et al., 2018; Azizzadenesheli
et al., 2019). Many of these approaches build estimates
p(x|y), which can scale poorly with dataset sizes and un-
derperform on high-dimensional data (Lipton et al., 2018).
Lipton et al. (2018) proposed Black-Box Shift Learning
(BBSL), which strives to efﬁciently estimate the weights
[w]i = q(y=i)
p(y=i) even in cases where the prediction model
ˆp(y = i|xk) is poorly calibrated or biased. BBSL pro-
ceeds as follows: let f be a function that accepts an in-
put and returns the model’s predicted class, let xk de-
note an example from a held-out portion of the train-
ing set, and let x′
k denote an example from the testing
set. The empirical estimate of w, denoted as ˆ
w, is com-
puted as ˆ
w = ˆ
C−1
ˆy,y ˆuˆy, where [ˆuˆy]i =
P
k 1{f(x′
k)=i}
m
and
[ ˆ
Cˆy,y]ij = 1
n
P
k 1{f(xk) = i and yk = j}. Because the
approach above is not guaranteed to produce positive values
for all elements of ˆ
w, any negative elements of ˆ
w are set
to 0 after they are estimated. Domain adaptation is then
performed by retraining the model on the entire training
set distribution with examples upweighted in accordance
with ˆ
w. Lipton et al. (2018) denote the version of BBSL
described above as BBSL-hard. They also compare to a
variant that they call BBSL-soft, which they describe as the
case where where f outputs probabilities rather than hard
classes. We interpreted this to mean [ˆuˆy]i =
P
k f(x′
k)i
m
and [ ˆ
Cˆy,y]ij = 1
n
P
k f(xk)i1{yk = j}. Azizzadenesheli
et al. (2019) further improved upon BBSL by including
regularization terms in a technique known as Regularized
Learning under Label Shift (RLLS). In our experiments, we
compare to BBSL-hard, BBSL-soft, RLLS-hard and RLLS-
soft. Regularization hyperparameters for RLLS were set in
accordance with the hard-coded values given in the publicly
available code provided by the authors at this url. Note
that BBSL and RLLS both require a portion of the training
set to be held out during the initial training phase in order
to accurately estimate the confusion matrix ˆ
Cˆy,y; in our
experiments involving calibration, we use this same heldout
set to calibrate the model.
3. Methods
3.1. No-Bias Vector Scaling and Bias-Corrected
Temperature Scaling
As shown in Fig. 1, we often found that TS alone resulted
in systematically biased estimates of p(yi|xk), while VS, a
generalization of TS that contains both class-speciﬁc bias
terms and class-speciﬁc scaling terms, did not exhibit as
much systematic bias. Intrigued by this observation, we
investigated the performance of two intermediaries between
Temperature Scaling and Vector Scaling. The ﬁrst, which
we refer to as No Bias Vector Scaling (NBVS), is equiv-
alent to vector scaling but with all the class-speciﬁc bias
parameters ﬁxed at zero. The second, which we refer to
as Bias-Corrected Temperature Scaling, is equivalent TS
Scaling but with the addition of the class-speciﬁc bias terms
from VS. As with TS and VS, the parameters are optimized
to minimize the NLL on the validation set. Note that in the
case of binary classiﬁcation, the parameterization of BCTS
reduces to Platt Scaling (Platt, 1999). Thus, BCTS can
be viewed as a multi-class generalization of Platt scaling.
Given ﬁtted calibration parameters, performing calibration
on test data takes O(mN) time where m is the number of
output classes and N is the number of datapoints.
3.2. Deﬁning source-domain priors in the EM
The EM algorithm of (Saerens et al., 2002) requires the user
to provide estimates of the source-domain prior class proba-
bilities ˆp(y = i). Let us consider two possible approaches
to estimating these probabilities. The ﬁrst approach, consid-
ered in the original paper, is to set ˆp(y = i) to the expected
value of the binary label y = i over the source domain
dataset. A second, less obvious, approach is to set it to the
expected value of ˆp(y = i|x) over the source domain dataset,

--- Page 4 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
formally denoted as Ex∼p(x)[ˆp(y = i|x)]. If ˆp(y = i|x)
were unbiased, we anticipate that the two approaches would
agree. However, depending on the calibration of ˆp(y = i|x),
this may not be the case, bringing us to:
Lemma A: In the absence of domain shift and in the limit
of sufﬁcient data, the EM algorithm will converge to the
original priors ˆp(y = i) if and only if ˆp(y = i) :=
Ex∼p(x)[ˆp(y = i|x)].
Proof: Note that the EM algorithm will converge when
ˆq(s+1)(y = i) = ˆq(s)(y = i). From the M-step, we know
that ˆq(s+1)(y = i) =
1
N
PN
k=1 ˆq(s)(y = i|xk), where the
examples xk are drawn from the target distribution. Substi-
tuting the formula for ˆq(s)(y = i|xk) from the E-step, we
have ˆq(s+1)(y = i) =
1
N
PN
k=1
ˆq(s)(y=i)
ˆ
p(y=i)
ˆp(y=i|xk)
Pm
j=1
ˆq(s)(y=j)
ˆ
p(y=j)
ˆp(y=j|xk).
To prove sufﬁciency, we consider the scenario where
ˆq(s)(y = i) = ˆp(y = i) and check whether convergence is
attained. If the samples in the target distribution are drawn
from the same distribution as the source, then in the limit
of sufﬁcient N, the value of ˆq(s+1)(y = 1) will approach
Ex∼p(x)
1
1 ˆp(y=i|xk)
Pm
j=1
1
1 ˆp(y=j|xk) = Ex∼p(x)ˆp(y = i|xk). As we
deﬁned ˆp(y = i) to equal Ex∼p(x)ˆp(y = i|xk), we get
ˆq(s+1)(y = 1) = ˆq(s)(y = 1), and convergence is attained.
To prove necessity, we simply observe that if we had not
deﬁned ˆp(y = i) to equal Ex∼p(x)ˆp(y = i|xk), then we
would not have ˆq(s+1)(y = 1) = ˆq(s)(y = 1), and conver-
gence would not be attained.
■
In the absence of domain shift, it is desirable that EM con-
verge to the original priors ˆp(y = i). In light of Lemma A,
we set ˆp(y = i) to the average value of ˆp(y = i|x) over the
source-domain validation set (we use the validation set to
avoid the effects of overﬁtting on the training set; this is the
same validation set used for calibration). If we instead com-
pute ˆp(y = i) by averaging binary labels in the validation
set, we observe poor (even detrimental) performance with
EM when the calibration lacks bias correction (Tab. A.1).
3.3. Convergence of Maximum Likelihood to the
Global Optimum
We prove that the maximum likelihood function for label
shift is concave. As a result, the EM algorithm of Saerens
et al. (2002) converges to the maximum likelihood estimate.
Lemma B: the maximum likelihood objective is concave.
Proof: Let ωi denote membership in class i, and let q(ωi)
& p(ωi) denote target & source domain priors. We seek
target-domain priors q(ω) that maximize the log-likelihood
l(X; q(ω)) = P
k log P
i q(xk|ωi). Because q(xk|ωi) is
not known explicitly, we rewrite the log likelihood in terms
of p(ωi|xk) and p(ωi) as follows:
l(X; q(ω)) =
X
k
log
X
i
q(xk|ωi)q(ωi)
=
X
k
log
X
i
p(xk|ωi)q(ωi)
(1)
=
X
k
log
X
i
p(ωi|xk)p(xk)
p(ωi)
q(ωi)
(2)
=
X
k
log
 
p(xk)
X
i
p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi)
q(ωi)
!
=
X
k
log(p(xk)) + log
X
i
p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi)
q(ωi)
where (1) follows from the label shift assumptions and (2)
follows from Bayes’ rule. Now note that the maximization
is independent of p(xk). Using the constant C to denote
P
k log(p(xk)), the objective can be written as:
max
q(ω)
C +
X
k
log
X
i
p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi)
q(ωi)
s.t.
1T · q(ω) = 1
q(ωi) ≥0
∀i
(3)
Both p(ωi|xk) and p(ωi) are constants with respect to q(ω).
Hence, the objective is a constant plus the sum of logs of lin-
ear functions in our decision variable, and the constraints are
afﬁne. Therefore, the maximization problem is concave. ■
Lemma C: given that p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i (i.e. every class con-
sidered has a non-zero probability of occurrence in the
source domain), the log likelihood is bounded above by
C + N log(1/ϵ).
Proof: We give a loose bound. Using the form of the likeli-
hood derived in Eqn. 3, we have:
l(X; q(ω)) = C +
X
k
log
 X
i
p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi)
q(ωi)
!
(4)
≤C +
X
k
log
 X
i
p(ωi|xk) · q(ωi)
ϵ
!
(5)
≤C +
X
k
log(1/ϵ ·
X
i
p(ωi|xk))
(6)
≤C + N · log(1/ϵ)
(7)
where (5) is using the given assumption on p(ωi), (6) is
using the fact that probabilities are ≤1, and (7) is due to
the fact that probabilities sum up to one.
■
Note that a similar assumption to p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i is adopted
by BBSL; if the source-domain probability of a class were 0,
we would simply exclude that class from the optimization.

--- Page 5 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
As a consequence of the likelihood being concave and
bounded, standard convex optimization algorithms would
converge to the global maximum likelihood estimate. We
used the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm in this
work for ease of implementation. For completeness, we
include the convergence proof for EM in Appendix H.
3.4. Summary of Proposed Algorithm
For convenience of the reader, we summarize our proposed
algorithm for label shift adaptation as follows:
1. Given a model f that outputs predicted probabilities,
calibrated the predictions of f on a held-out validation
using an appropriately strong calibration algorithm. In
this work, we observed that Bias-Corrected Tempera-
ture Scaling and Vector Scaling work well.
2. Average the calibrated predictions ˆp(y = i|x) over this
held-out validation set to obtain the estimated source-
domain class priors ˆp(y = i).
3. Given samples from the target domain, use the esti-
mated ˆp(y = i) and the calibrated predictor ˆp(y = i|x)
to optimize the concave maximum likelihood objec-
tive in Eqn. 3 w.r.t. the estimated target-domain class
proportions ˆq(y = i).
4. After ﬁnding ˆq(y = i), compute the adapted predic-
tions for the target domain as follows (this is similar
to the E-step of EM, and follows from Bayes’ rule; a
derivation can be found in Saerens et al. (2002)):
ˆq(y = i|x) =
ˆq(y=i)
ˆp(y=i) ˆp(y = i|x)
Pm
j=1
ˆq(y=j)
ˆp(y=j) ˆp(y = j|x)
(8)
3.5. Metrics for evaluating adaptation to label shift
The ﬁrst metric we consider is the mean squared error in
the true weights compared to the estimated weights (Az-
izzadenesheli et al., 2019; Lipton et al., 2018). Let us de-
note the true target-domain prior as q(y = i) and the true
source domain prior as p(y = i). The true class weights
are deﬁned as wi := q(y = i)/p(y = i). Both BBSL
and RLLS directly output estimated weights ˆ
wi. For Max
Likelihood, the weights can be obtained by dividing the esti-
mated target-domain priors ˆq(y = i) by the source-domain
priors ˆp(y = i) (where the source priors are computed as
described in Sec.
3.2). The mean squared error of the
weights is then simply 1
N
P
i( ˆ
wi −wi)2, where N is the
number of classes.
The second metric we consider is the improvement in ac-
curacy of the domain-adapted model predictions relative
to using the original model predictions. Given the ratio
ˆq(y = i)/ˆp(y = i), the adapted model predictions can be
computed as in Eqn. 4, similar to the E-step of EM. For
Max Likelihood, we use these adapted predictions to assess
accuracy. By contrast, in both the BBSL and RLLS papers,
model retraining was performed to obtain adapted predic-
tions. Due to computational constraints, as well as recent
observations that retraining deep neural networks using im-
portance weights does not work as well as expected (Byrd
and Lipton, 2019), we did not perform model retraining.
Thus, we use the MSE of importance weights to compare
Max Likelihood to BBSL and RLLS, and use accuracy only
for comparing the impact of different calibration algorithms
on the Maximum Likelihood estimate1.
4. Results
4.1. Experimental Setup
We evaluated the efﬁcacy of BBSL, RLLS and Max Likeli-
hood coupled to different calibration approaches on MNIST,
CIFAR10/CIFAR100, and a diabetic retinopathy detection
dataset. For our experiments on MNIST, we used the ar-
chitecture from Azizzadenesheli et al. (2019), and for our
experiments on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, we trained ten
different models, each with a different random seed, using
the code from Geifman and El-Yaniv (2017). For MNIST,
CIFAR10, and CIFAR100, 10K examples of the training set
were reserved as a held-out validation set. Dirichlet shift
was simulated on the testing set by sampling with replace-
ment in accordance with class proportions generated by a
dirichlet distribution with uniform α values of 0.1, 1.0 and
10.0 (smaller values of α result in more extreme label shift).
Samples from the validation set were used for calibration,
EM initialization and BBSL & RLLS confusion matrix esti-
mation. Accuracy was reported on the label-shifted testing
set, while the calibration metrics of NLL and ECE (with 15
bins) were reported on the unshifted testing set. In addition
to exploring different degrees of dirichlet shift, we also in-
vestigated how the algorithms behaved when the number of
samples used in the validation and testing set were varied.
For example, in experiments with n = 8000, only 8000
samples from the validation set and 8000 samples from the
shifted testing set were presented to the domain adaptation
and calibration algorithms. For each model, for a given α
and n, 10 trials were performed, where each trial consisted
1Technically speaking, we could use the class ratios produced
by BBSL and RLLS in conjunction with the E-step update to ob-
tain adapted predictions without model retraining; however, when
the predictions are not calibrated, this adaptation can sometimes
decrease test-set accuracy. To avoid potentially misleading the
reader into thinking BBSL and RLLS can harm test-set accuracy,
we did not report the results of such adaptation. However, the over-
all performance trends were similar, in that EM with bias-corrected
calibration performed the best.

--- Page 6 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.01049; 4.0
0.00763; 4.0
0.00795; 4.0
0.00283; 4.0
0.00202; 4.0
0.00147; 4.0
0.00191; 2.0
0.001; 2.0
0.0006; 2.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.00443; 3.0
0.00214; 2.0
0.00125; 2.0
0.00266; 2.0
0.00135; 3.0
0.00074; 2.0
0.00244; 3.0
0.00123; 3.0
0.00055; 2.5
BBSL-soft
None
0.00309; 1.0
0.00133; 1.0
0.00092; 1.0
0.00188; 1.0
0.00108; 1.0
0.00057; 1.0
0.00187; 1.0
0.0009; 1.0
0.00047; 1.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.00405; 2.0
0.00209; 2.0
0.00124; 2.0
0.00265; 2.5
0.00135; 2.0
0.00074; 3.0
0.00244; 3.0
0.00123; 3.0
0.00055; 3.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.00316; 1.0
0.00127; 1.0
0.0009; 1.0
0.00183; 1.0
0.00108; 1.0
0.00057; 1.0
0.00187; 1.0
0.0009; 1.0
0.00047; 1.0
EM
TS
0.00944; 2.0
0.00705; 2.0
0.00693; 2.0
0.00262; 2.0
0.00192; 2.0
0.00148; 2.0
0.00195; 2.0
0.00101; 2.0
0.00058; 2.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.0031; 1.0
0.00132; 1.0
0.00091; 1.0
0.00191; 1.0
0.00102; 1.0
0.0006; 0.0
0.00179; 1.0
0.00095; 1.0
0.00048; 1.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.00312; 1.0
0.00125; 1.0
0.0009; 1.0
0.00186; 1.0
0.00102; 1.0
0.0006; 1.0
0.00179; 1.0
0.00095; 1.0
0.00048; 1.0
EM
NBVS
0.0014; 0.0
0.00106; 0.0
0.00075; 0.0
0.00133; 0.0
0.00071; 0.0
0.00043; 0.0
0.00161; 0.0
0.00079; 0.0
0.00047; 0.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.0028; 1.0
0.00137; 1.0
0.00098; 1.0
0.00175; 1.0
0.00096; 1.0
0.00061; 1.0
0.00179; 1.0
0.00081; 1.0
0.00048; 1.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.00275; 1.0
0.00131; 1.0
0.00094; 1.0
0.00168; 1.0
0.00096; 1.0
0.00061; 1.0
0.00179; 1.0
0.00081; 1.0
0.00048; 1.0
EM
BCTS
0.00037; 0.0
0.00034; 0.0
0.00022; 0.0
0.00126; 0.0
0.00071; 0.0
0.00043; 0.0
0.00161; 0.0
0.00077; 0.0
0.00047; 0.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.00288; 2.0
0.00126; 1.0
0.00104; 1.0
0.00171; 1.0
0.00102; 1.0
0.0006; 1.0
0.00176; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.00048; 1.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.00284; 1.0
0.00124; 1.0
0.00093; 1.0
0.00169; 1.0
0.00102; 1.0
0.0006; 1.0
0.00176; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.00048; 1.0
EM
VS
0.00061; 0.0
0.00031; 0.0
0.0002; 0.0
0.00118; 0.0
0.00067; 0.0
0.0004; 0.0
0.00167; 0.0
0.00076; 0.0
0.00045; 0.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.00306; 2.0
0.00134; 1.0
0.00103; 1.0
0.00173; 1.0
0.00102; 1.0
0.00061; 1.0
0.00172; 1.0
0.00082; 1.0
0.00047; 1.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.00298; 1.0
0.00133; 1.0
0.00091; 1.0
0.00171; 1.0
0.00102; 1.5
0.00061; 1.0
0.00172; 1.0
0.00082; 1.0
0.00047; 1.0
Table 1. CIFAR10: Comparison of EM, BBSL and RLLS (dirichlet shift). Value before the semicolon is the median MSE in the
estimated shift weights (as deﬁned in Sec. 3.5). Value after the semicolon is the median rank of a method relative to the others in the
group that use the same calibration. α represents the dirichlet shift parameter (larger α corresponds to less extreme shift), n represents
the sample size for both the validation set and the label-shifted test set. A bold value in a group is not signiﬁcantly different from the
best-performing method in the group, as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01. See Table C.2 for an equivalent table but
with statistical comparisons done across all calibration methods. EM tends to outperform BBSL and RLLS when calibration techniques
involving class-speciﬁc bias parameters are used.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.01
ρ = 0.9
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.00197; 2.0
0.00107; 2.0
0.00067; 2.0
0.00584; 1.0
0.00305; 0.0
0.00316; 2.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.00197; 3.0
0.00122; 4.0
0.00079; 4.0
0.00897; 3.0
0.00689; 4.0
0.00608; 4.0
BBSL-soft
None
0.00161; 1.0
0.00099; 1.0
0.00057; 1.0
0.00662; 2.0
0.00379; 1.0
0.00298; 1.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.00197; 3.0
0.00122; 3.0
0.00079; 3.0
0.00868; 2.5
0.00676; 3.0
0.00593; 3.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.00161; 0.5
0.00099; 1.0
0.00057; 0.0
0.00622; 1.0
0.00379; 1.0
0.00298; 1.0
EM
TS
0.00162; 2.0
0.00084; 0.0
0.00054; 0.0
0.00318; 0.0
0.00155; 0.0
0.00085; 0.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.00161; 1.0
0.00091; 1.0
0.00054; 2.0
0.00659; 2.0
0.00395; 1.0
0.00339; 1.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.00161; 1.0
0.00091; 1.0
0.00054; 1.0
0.00627; 1.0
0.00393; 1.0
0.00339; 1.0
EM
NBVS
0.00158; 0.0
0.00076; 0.0
0.00054; 0.0
0.00112; 0.0
0.00059; 0.0
0.00038; 0.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.00162; 1.0
0.00088; 2.0
0.00057; 2.0
0.00607; 2.0
0.00385; 1.0
0.00349; 1.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.00162; 1.0
0.00088; 1.0
0.00057; 1.0
0.006; 1.0
0.0038; 1.0
0.00349; 2.0
EM
BCTS
0.00153; 0.0
0.00076; 0.0
0.00052; 0.0
0.0006; 0.0
0.00037; 0.0
0.00028; 0.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.00158; 1.0
0.00087; 2.0
0.00055; 2.0
0.00623; 2.0
0.00383; 1.0
0.00338; 1.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.00158; 1.0
0.00087; 1.0
0.00055; 1.0
0.00603; 1.0
0.00378; 2.0
0.00338; 2.0
EM
VS
0.00155; 0.0
0.00076; 0.0
0.00052; 0.0
0.00067; 0.0
0.00042; 0.0
0.00033; 0.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.00171; 1.0
0.00086; 2.0
0.00056; 2.0
0.00641; 2.0
0.00407; 2.0
0.00393; 1.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.00171; 1.0
0.00086; 1.0
0.00056; 1.0
0.00626; 1.0
0.00405; 1.0
0.00393; 2.0
Table 2. MNIST: Comparison of EM, BBSL and RLLS (“tweak-one” shift). Value before the semicolon is the median MSE in the
estimated shift weights. Value after semicolon is the median rank of a method relative to others in the group that use the same calibration.
A bold value in a group is not signiﬁcantly different from the best-performing method in the group, as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test
at p < 0.01. See Table D.2 for an equivalent table but with statistical comparisons done across all calibration methods. EM tends to
outperform BBSL and RLLS when calibration techniques involving class-speciﬁc bias parameters are used.
of a different sampling (without replacement) of the vali-
dation set as well as a different sampling of the dirichlet
prior and the label-shifted testing set. This resulted in a total
of 100 experiments (10 for each of the 10 different mod-
els). Statistical signiﬁcance was calculated using a signed
Wilcoxon test with a one-sided p-value threshold of 0.01.
For MNIST and CIFAR10, we also explored “tweak one”
shift (Lipton et al., 2018), where the prior of the fourth class
was set to a parameter ρ and the remaining class priors were
set to (1 −ρ)/9. We explored ρ = 0.01 and ρ = 0.9.

--- Page 7 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10.0
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
EM
None
1.80113; 4.0
1.67187; 4.0
1.7157; 4.0
0.55795; 4.0
0.54112; 4.0
0.55955; 4.0
0.3896; 4.0
0.37585; 4.0
0.36337; 4.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.83095; 3.0
0.68099; 3.0
0.58656; 3.0
0.33542; 3.0
0.27998; 3.0
0.24659; 3.0
0.25694; 3.0
0.21736; 3.0
0.20637; 3.0
BBSL-soft
None
0.5279; 2.0
0.47521; 2.0
0.44263; 2.0
0.23637; 2.0
0.21324; 2.0
0.18605; 2.0
0.18842; 2.0
0.16108; 2.0
0.14018; 2.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.4577; 1.0
0.38413; 1.0
0.37675; 1.0
0.20285; 1.0
0.16017; 1.0
0.14228; 1.0
0.16412; 1.0
0.13842; 1.0
0.12127; 1.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.33882; 1.0
0.2728; 0.0
0.2878; 0.0
0.13859; 0.0
0.12697; 0.0
0.10567; 0.0
0.12528; 0.0
0.11011; 0.0
0.10056; 0.0
EM
TS
0.41127; 1.0
0.34963; 1.0
0.30451; 1.0
0.23803; 2.0
0.21715; 2.0
0.19781; 2.0
0.16408; 2.0
0.14477; 2.0
0.13852; 2.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.40279; 1.0
0.34713; 1.0
0.33012; 1.0
0.18774; 1.0
0.15665; 1.0
0.12639; 1.0
0.13409; 1.0
0.10951; 1.0
0.09703; 1.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.27236; 1.0
0.22426; 1.0
0.22697; 1.0
0.12255; 0.0
0.10639; 0.0
0.08221; 0.0
0.11395; 0.0
0.08803; 0.0
0.07868; 0.0
EM
NBVS
0.1637; 0.0
0.15904; 0.0
0.14348; 0.0
0.1042; 0.0
0.10523; 0.0
0.10777; 1.0
0.10122; 0.0
0.09874; 1.0
0.09729; 2.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.40856; 2.0
0.33122; 2.0
0.29594; 2.0
0.17545; 2.0
0.1409; 2.0
0.11336; 2.0
0.13601; 2.0
0.113; 1.0
0.09731; 1.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.2797; 1.0
0.21465; 1.0
0.23037; 1.0
0.11469; 1.0
0.09903; 1.0
0.08341; 1.0
0.11303; 1.0
0.08868; 1.0
0.07531; 0.0
EM
BCTS
0.1101; 0.0
0.10824; 0.0
0.11636; 0.0
0.08838; 0.0
0.09102; 0.0
0.0876; 1.0
0.09207; 0.0
0.08707; 1.0
0.08781; 2.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.40887; 2.0
0.32629; 2.0
0.30435; 2.0
0.17923; 2.0
0.14756; 2.0
0.11536; 2.0
0.13698; 2.0
0.11267; 2.0
0.09748; 1.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.26594; 1.0
0.2305; 1.0
0.23604; 1.0
0.11498; 1.0
0.09755; 1.0
0.08309; 1.0
0.1085; 1.0
0.08672; 1.0
0.07252; 0.0
EM
VS
0.09485; 0.0
0.08792; 0.0
0.0862; 0.0
0.07684; 0.0
0.07922; 0.0
0.07773; 0.0
0.09387; 0.0
0.08796; 1.0
0.08981; 2.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.43085; 2.0
0.3216; 2.0
0.30221; 2.0
0.16715; 2.0
0.13847; 2.0
0.11169; 2.0
0.13075; 2.0
0.10971; 1.5
0.09433; 1.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.28941; 1.0
0.21363; 1.0
0.22405; 1.0
0.11627; 1.0
0.09894; 1.0
0.08267; 1.0
0.11426; 1.0
0.08623; 1.0
0.07414; 0.5
Table 3. CIFAR100: Comparison of EM, BBSL and RLLS (dirichlet shift). Value before the semicolon is the median MSE in the
estimated shift weights. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of a method relative to the others in the group that use the same
calibration. A bold value in a group is not signiﬁcantly different from the best-performing method in the group, as measured by a paired
Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01. See Table E.1 for an equivalent table but with statistical comparisons done across all calibration methods.
EM tends to outperform BBSL and RLLS when calibration techniques involving class-speciﬁc bias parameters are used.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.9
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
EM
None
0.35073; 0.0
0.30498; 0.0
0.19709; 0.0
0.0899; 2.0
0.0596; 2.0
0.05666; 3.0
BBSL-hard
None
1.83879; 4.0
1.4584; 4.0
0.81962; 4.0
0.31856; 4.0
0.10582; 4.0
0.0491; 3.0
BBSL-soft
None
1.4041; 2.0
0.71345; 2.0
0.43408; 2.0
0.10441; 2.5
0.04494; 2.0
0.02562; 2.0
RLLS-hard
None
1.07889; 2.0
1.08159; 3.0
0.74669; 3.0
0.05118; 1.0
0.02865; 1.0
0.02458; 1.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.91948; 2.0
0.63483; 1.0
0.41057; 1.0
0.03602; 1.0
0.0225; 1.0
0.02351; 1.0
EM
TS
0.47048; 0.0
0.29683; 0.0
0.20944; 0.0
0.08077; 1.0
0.05537; 2.0
0.05268; 2.0
BBSL-soft
TS
1.26587; 2.0
0.57077; 2.0
0.38372; 2.0
0.09552; 1.5
0.03859; 1.0
0.02165; 1.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.80812; 1.0
0.56293; 1.0
0.37624; 1.0
0.0352; 0.0
0.02457; 0.0
0.02054; 0.5
EM
NBVS
0.51515; 0.0
0.33256; 0.0
0.24066; 0.0
0.09137; 1.5
0.08415; 2.0
0.08002; 2.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
1.62832; 2.0
0.70875; 2.0
0.45962; 2.0
0.09014; 1.0
0.03608; 1.0
0.01769; 1.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.77171; 1.0
0.56492; 1.0
0.40272; 1.0
0.04301; 1.0
0.03258; 1.0
0.02541; 0.5
EM
BCTS
0.40245; 0.0
0.2475; 0.0
0.19461; 0.0
0.02267; 0.0
0.01354; 0.0
0.01043; 0.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
1.40016; 2.0
0.52628; 2.0
0.46372; 2.0
0.05524; 1.0
0.02529; 1.0
0.01419; 1.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.87398; 1.0
0.50668; 1.0
0.42255; 1.0
0.0384; 1.0
0.02826; 1.0
0.02245; 1.0
EM
VS
0.53081; 0.0
0.26442; 0.0
0.21641; 0.0
0.02388; 0.0
0.01307; 0.0
0.00953; 0.0
BBSL-soft
VS
1.36527; 2.0
0.50393; 2.0
0.48291; 1.5
0.04678; 1.0
0.02485; 1.0
0.01543; 1.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.82992; 1.0
0.47802; 1.0
0.42028; 1.0
0.04096; 1.0
0.02948; 1.0
0.022; 1.0
Table 4. Kaggle Diabetic Retinopathy: Comparison of EM, BBSL and RLLS. ρ represents proportion of healthy examples in shifted
domain; source domain has ρ = 0.73. Value before semicolon is the median MSE in the estimated shift weights. Value after the semicolon
is the median rank of a method relative to others in the group that use the same calibration. A bold value in a group is not signiﬁcantly
different from the best-performing method in the group (paired Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01). See Table F.1 for an equivalent table but
with statistical comparisons done across all calibration methods. EM tends to outperform BBSL and RLLS when calibration techniques
involving class-speciﬁc bias parameters are used.
The Kaggle Diabetic Retinopathy dataset (Kaggle, 2015)
is a collection of retinal fundus images and an associated
“grade” from 0-4, where 0 indicates healthy and 1-4 indicate
progressively more severe stages of retinopathy. For our ex-
periments, we used the publicly-available pretrained model
from De Fauw (2015), but modiﬁed it so as to make predic-
tions on only one eye at a time (speciﬁcally, we supplied
the mirror image of a given eye as the input for the second
eye). Because test-set labels are unavailable, we separated
the validation set used during the training of the model
(consisting of 3514 examples) into “pseudo-validation” and
“pseudo-test” sets. Speciﬁcally, for each of 100 trials, we

--- Page 8 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
5.275; 4.0
5.225; 4.0
5.319; 4.0
1.75; 4.0
1.65; 4.0
1.669; 4.0
0.275; 3.0
0.175; 3.0
0.25; 4.0
EM
TS
5.6; 2.0
5.513; 3.0
5.488; 3.0
1.725; 3.0
1.713; 3.0
1.775; 3.0
0.25; 4.0
0.188; 3.0
0.244; 3.0
EM
NBVS
5.85; 2.0
5.725; 2.0
5.806; 2.0
2.125; 2.0
2.013; 2.0
2.15; 2.0
0.7; 1.0
0.775; 1.0
0.788; 2.0
EM
BCTS
5.825; 2.0
5.775; 1.0
5.75; 1.0
2.15; 1.0
2.075; 1.0
2.081; 1.0
0.725; 1.0
0.8; 1.0
0.838; 1.0
EM
VS
5.625; 2.0
5.675; 1.0
5.775; 1.0
2.15; 1.0
2.1; 1.0
2.187; 1.0
0.75; 1.0
0.812; 1.0
0.862; 1.0
Table 5. CIFAR10: Comparison of calibration methods when using EM adaptation to dirichlet shift, with ∆%accuracy as the
metric. Unlike BBSL and RLLS, the EM algorithm does not rely on retraining to produce domain adapted probabilities. Value before
the semicolon is the median change in %accuracy relative to a baseline of no adaptation. Value after the semicolon is the median rank
compared to other methods in the same column. Bold values in a column are not signiﬁcantly different from the best performing method in
the column, as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p ≤0.01. Calibration techniques involving class-speciﬁc bias parameters (namely
BCTS and VS) tend to achieve the best performance.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10.0
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
EM
None
14.136; 4.0
14.153; 4.0
14.22; 4.0
11.971; 4.0
12.112; 4.0
12.155; 4.0
11.779; 4.0
11.682; 4.0
11.89; 4.0
EM
TS
24.479; 2.0
24.371; 2.0
24.855; 2.0
21.157; 2.0
21.271; 2.0
20.99; 2.0
20.7; 2.5
20.894; 3.0
20.915; 2.5
EM
NBVS
24.079; 2.0
24.053; 2.0
24.575; 2.0
20.986; 2.0
21.382; 2.0
21.53; 2.0
21.036; 2.0
20.947; 2.0
21.025; 2.0
EM
BCTS
24.271; 2.0
24.112; 1.0
24.3; 1.0
21.321; 1.0
21.506; 1.0
21.71; 1.0
21.143; 1.0
21.329; 1.0
21.125; 1.0
EM
VS
24.829; 1.0
24.518; 1.0
24.51; 1.0
21.3; 1.0
21.629; 1.0
21.93; 1.0
21.221; 1.0
21.282; 1.0
21.21; 1.0
Table 6. CIFAR100: Comparison of calibration methods when using EM adaptation to dirichlet shift, with ∆%accuracy as the
metric. Unlike BBSL and RLLS, the EM algorithm does not rely on retraining to produce domain adapted probabilities. Value before
the semicolon is the median change in %accuracy relative to a baseline of no adaptation. Value after the semicolon is the median rank
compared to other methods in the same column. Bold values in a column are not signiﬁcantly different from the best performing method in
the column, as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p ≤0.01. Calibration techniques involving class-speciﬁc bias parameters (namely
BCTS and VS) tend to achieve the best performance.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.9
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
EM
None
2.0; 3.0
2.0; 4.0
2.2; 4.0
1.4; 4.0
1.5; 4.0
1.567; 4.0
EM
TS
2.2; 3.0
2.3; 3.0
2.667; 3.0
1.6; 3.0
2.0; 3.0
2.133; 3.0
EM
NBVS
3.5; 2.0
4.1; 2.0
4.233; 2.0
2.2; 2.0
2.4; 2.0
2.467; 2.0
EM
BCTS
3.8; 1.0
4.65; 1.0
4.633; 1.0
3.6; 0.0
3.6; 0.0
3.733; 0.0
EM
VS
3.8; 1.0
4.4; 1.0
4.633; 1.0
3.5; 1.0
3.6; 1.0
3.733; 1.0
Table 7. Kaggle Diabetic Retinopathy: Comparison of calibration methods when using EM adaptation to domain shift, with
∆%accuracy as the metric. ρ represents proportion of healthy examples in shifted domain; source distribution has ρ = 0.73. Unlike
BBSL and RLLS, the EM algorithm does not rely on retraining to produce domain adapted probabilities. Value before the semicolon is
the median change in %accuracy relative to a baseline of no adaptation. Value after the semicolon is the median rank compared to other
methods in the same column. Bold values in a column are not signiﬁcantly different from the best performing method in the column, as
measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p ≤0.01. Calibration techniques involving class-speciﬁc bias parameters (namely BCTS and VS)
tend to achieve the best performance.
sampled n examples from the original validation set with-
out replacement to form a pseudo-validation set, and kept
the remaining examples as the pseudo-test set. Calibration
was performed on the pseudo-validation set, and calibration
metrics of NLL and ECE were reported on the pseudo-test
set. Domain shift was then simulated by sampling from the
pseudo-test set in such a way that the proportion of “healthy”
labels was set to a fraction ρ, and the relative proportions
of retinopathy grades was kept the same as in the source
distribution. In the source distribution, ρ = 0.73; for the
simulated domain shift, we explored ρ = 0.5 and ρ = 0.9.
4.2. Max Likelihood With Appropriate Calibration
Performs Well At Estimating Shift Weights
We compared the performance of maximum likelihood
(EM), BBSL and RLLS in the presence of different types
of calibration, using both MSE of the shift weights as the
metric (Sec. 3.5). Results are in Tables 1, 2, 3, 4, C.4 &
D.3. Across all datasets, we observed the following general
trends: ﬁrst, in the absence of calibration, BBSL and RLLS
tend to outperform EM, with RLLS tending to perform the
best (consistent with the results in Azizzadenesheli et al.
(2019)). However, as calibration improves, so does the per-

--- Page 9 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
formance of EM. In particular, the best overall performance
is achieved when using the variants of temperature scaling
that contain class-speciﬁc bias parameters - namely BCTS
and VS - in combination with EM.
We also computed the improvement in accuracy achieved
by EM with different calibration methods compared to an
unadapted baseline (Tables 5, 6, 7, C.1). Across datasets,
we observed that either BCTS or VS tended to achieve the
best accuracy. To reconcile this with the observation in Guo
et al. (2017) that VS did not give the best ECE compared
to TS, we calculated the Negative Log Likelihood (NLL)
of different calibration methods on an unshifted test set
and found that BCTS and VS tended to achieve the best
NLL, even when they did not yield the best ECE (Sec. B),
indicating that the ECE and NLL metrics do not always
agree with each other. Empirically, we found that the NLL
corresponds better with the improvement that a calibration
method will give to domain adaptation (Sec. G). This is
consistent with other reports stating that ECE computed
using only information about the most conﬁdently predicted
class, as was done in Guo et al. (2017), is perhaps not the
best metric (Vaicenavicius et al., 2019).
5. Discussion
In this work, we explored the effect of calibration on pro-
cedures designed to perform domain adaptation to label
shift. In experiments on CIFAR10, MNIST, CIFAR100 and
diabetic retinopathy detection, we found that maximum like-
lihood methods such as EM with speciﬁc types of calibra-
tion tends to outperform moment matching methods such as
BBSL and RLLS. In particular, we found that the best results
were achieved when the calibration method involves class-
speciﬁc bias parameters that can reduce systematic bias in
the class probabilities. This capacity for bias correction is
absent from the popular Temperature Scaling approach rec-
ommended by Guo et al. (2017). We reconcile this by noting
that Guo et al. evaluated calibration using ECE computed on
only the most conﬁdently predicted classes, which is known
to be misleading (Vaicenavicius et al., 2019), and by observ-
ing that Vector Scaling (which does include class-speciﬁc
bias parameters) performed almost as well as Temperature
Scaling in their evaluation.
In addition, we observe that when the calibrated probabili-
ties retain systematic bias, domain adaptation via maximum
likelihood is sensitive to the strategy used to compute the
source-domain priors. If the source-domain priors ˆp(y = i)
are not deﬁned in a way that mirrors the systematic bias in
the predicted probabilities ˆp(y = i|x), then maximum like-
lihood will estimate a label shift even if the target domain is
identical to the source domain (Lemma A) and can produce
highly detrimental results (Tables A.1). By contrast, if the
source domain priors for maximum likelihood are speciﬁed
as recommend in Sec. 3.2, maximum likelihood becomes
substantially more tolerant of systematic bias in the cali-
brated probabilities, although it does not tend to outperform
BBSL or RLLS in the presence of poor calibration. We con-
jecture that maximum likelihood is sensitive to systematic
bias because the estimate of ˆq(y = i|xk) (e.g. as computed
in the E-step of EM) relies heavily on the ratio ˆq(y=i)
ˆp(y=i). Sys-
tematic bias is deﬁned as error in ˆp(y = i), which, as it
appears in the denominator, could manifest as large errors
in ˆq(y=i)
ˆp(y=i) - particularly when ˆp(y = i) is small.
One concern when using EM to ﬁnd the maximum likeli-
hood estimate is the possibility of getting trapped in local
minima. To address this concern, we analyzed the likeli-
hood function and determined that it is concave and bounded
(Sec. 3.3). Thus, EM (and any standard convex optimiza-
tion algorithm) converges to the global maximum of the
likelihood.
Following the appearance of this work online, an indepen-
dent study by Garg et al. (2020) veriﬁed that our proposed
approach of coupling bias-corrected temperature scaling
(BCTS) with maximum-likelihood estimation “uniformly
dominates” compared to BBSL and RLLS. The same study
also developed a theoretical analysis of the maximum likeli-
hood approach that conﬁrms the importance of calibration
in achieving good performance.
In conclusion, we presented an algorithm that is simple,
computationally efﬁcient, and avoids both hyperparameter
tuning and the pitfalls associated with retraining deep learn-
ing models with importance weighting (Byrd and Lipton,
2019). When tested empirically on a variety of datasets and
data shifts, it produces better or comparable results com-
pared to the current state-of-the-art. We posit that maximum
likelihood with bias-corrected calibration will prove particu-
larly useful in big data settings where deep learning models
are more likely to be deployed.
6. Author Contributions
AS conceived of the method and implemented the calibra-
tion & label shift adaptation algorithms. AS and AA de-
signed & conducted experiments, and wrote the manuscript,
with guidance and feedback from AK.
7. Acknowledgements
We thank the members of the Kundaje lab for discussion
and feedback.

--- Page 10 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
References
Storkey Amos. When training and test sets are different:
Characterizing learning transfer. In Dataset Shift in Ma-
chine Learning. The MIT Press, 2008.
Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anqi Liu, Fanny Yang, and Ani-
mashree Anandkumar. Regularized learning for domain
adaptation under label shifts. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=rJl0r3R9KX.
Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Lipton. What is the effect of im-
portance weighting in deep learning? In Kamalika Chaud-
huri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of
the 36th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pages 872–881, Long Beach, California, USA, 09–
15 Jun 2019. PMLR. URL http://proceedings.
mlr.press/v97/byrd19a.html.
Yee Seng Chan and Hwee Tou Ng. Word sense disambigua-
tion with distribution estimation.
Jeffrey De Fauw.
Jeffreydf/kaggle diabetic retinopathy:
Fifth place solution of the kaggle diabetic retinopathy
competition. https://github.com/JeffreyDF/
kaggle_diabetic_retinopathy, Oct 2015. (Ac-
cessed on 01/22/2019).
Morris H DeGroot and Stephen E Fienberg. The compari-
son and evaluation of forecasters. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician), 32(1-2):
12–22, 1983.
Saurabh Garg, Yifan Wu, Sivaraman Balakrishnan, and
Zachary C Lipton. A uniﬁed view of label shift estimation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.07554, 2020.
Y. Geifman and R. El-Yaniv. Selective Classiﬁcation for
Deep Neural Networks. ArXiv e-prints, 2017.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q. Wein-
berger. On calibration of modern neural networks. In
Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of
the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 1321–1330, International Convention Centre, Syd-
ney, Australia, 06–11 Aug 2017. PMLR. URL http://
proceedings.mlr.press/v70/guo17a.html.
Kaggle.
Kaggle competition on diabetic retinopa-
thy
detection.
https://www.kaggle.com/
c/diabetic-retinopathy-detection#
description, 2015.
Volodymyr Kuleshov and Stefano Ermon. Reliable con-
ﬁdence estimation via online learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.03594, pages 2586–2594, 2016.
Volodymyr Kuleshov and Percy S Liang. Calibrated struc-
tured prediction. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 3474–3482, 2015.
Zachary Lipton, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Alexander Smola.
Detecting and correcting for label shift with black
box predictors.
In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause,
editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Pro-
ceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3122–
3130, Stockholmsmssan, Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul
2018. PMLR.
URL http://proceedings.mlr.
press/v80/lipton18a.html.
Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory Cooper, and Milos
Hauskrecht. Obtaining well calibrated probabilities using
bayesian binning. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2015.
Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil and Rich Caruana. Predicting
good probabilities with supervised learning. In Proceed-
ings of the 22nd international conference on Machine
learning, pages 625–632. ACM, 2005.
John C Platt. Probabilistic outputs for support vector ma-
chines and comparisons to regularized likelihood meth-
ods. In ADVANCES IN LARGE MARGIN CLASSIFIERS,
1999.
Marco Saerens, Patrice Latinne, and Christine Decaestecker.
Adjusting the outputs of a classiﬁer to new a priori prob-
abilities: a simple procedure. Neural Comput., 14(1):
21–41, January 2002.
Bernhard Schoelkopf, Dominik Janzing, Jonas Peters, Eleni
Sgouritsa, Kun Zhang, and Joris Mooij. On causal and
anticausal learning. June 2012.
Amos Storkey. When training and test sets are different:
characterizing learning transfer.
Juozas Vaicenavicius, David Widmann, Carl Andersson,
Fredrik Lindsten, Jacob Roll, and Thomas B Sch¨on. Eval-
uating model calibration in classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.06977, 2019.
Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan.
Obtaining cali-
brated probability estimates from decision trees and naive
bayesian classiﬁers. Citeseer.
Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. Transforming classiﬁer
scores into accurate multiclass probability estimates. In
Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD international
conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining,
pages 694–699. ACM, 2002.

--- Page 11 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Kun Zhang, Bernhard Schlkopf, Krikamol Muandet,
and Zhikun Wang.
Domain adaptation under tar-
get and conditional shift.
In Sanjoy Dasgupta and
David McAllester, editors, Proceedings of the 30th
International Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
ume 28 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 819–827, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 17–19 Jun
2013. PMLR.
URL http://proceedings.mlr.
press/v28/zhang13d.html.

--- Page 12 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
A. Comparison of Strategies for Initializing EM Source Probabilities
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.9
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
EM: source priors from preds
None
2.0; 0.0
2.0; 0.0
2.2; 0.0
1.4; 0.0
1.5; 0.0
1.567; 0.0
EM: source priors from labels
None
-3.4; 1.0
-3.6; 1.0
-3.367; 1.0
1.0; 1.0
1.0; 1.0
1.067; 1.0
EM: source priors from preds
TS
2.2; 0.0
2.3; 0.0
2.667; 0.0
1.6; 0.0
2.0; 0.0
2.133; 0.0
EM: source priors from labels
TS
-64.5; 1.0
-65.1; 1.0
-65.267; 1.0
-91.4; 1.0
-91.9; 1.0
-91.833; 1.0
EM: source priors from preds
NBVS
3.5; 0.0
4.1; 0.0
4.233; 0.0
2.2; 0.0
2.4; 0.0
2.467; 0.0
EM: source priors from labels
NBVS
-5.6; 1.0
-4.6; 1.0
-4.567; 1.0
0.4; 1.0
0.6; 1.0
0.7; 1.0
EM: source priors from preds
BCTS
3.8; 0.0
4.65; 0.0
4.633; 0.0
3.6; 0.0
3.6; 0.0
3.733; 0.0
EM: source priors from labels
BCTS
3.8; 1.0
4.65; 1.0
4.633; 1.0
3.6; 1.0
3.6; 1.0
3.733; 1.0
EM: source priors from preds
VS
3.8; 0.0
4.4; 0.0
4.633; 0.0
3.5; 0.0
3.6; 0.0
3.733; 0.0
EM: source priors from labels
VS
3.8; 1.0
4.4; 1.0
4.633; 1.0
3.5; 1.0
3.6; 1.0
3.733; 1.0
Table A.1. The strategy for computing EM source priors heavily affects domain adaptation if probabilities retain systematic bias.
Value before the semicolon is the median improvement in %accuracy (across 100 trials) caused by applying domain adaptation to the
predictions on a diabetic retinopathy prediction task. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of a particular method relative to the
other method in the pair. Domain shift is induced by varying the proportion of “healthy” examples ρ; in the source distribution, ρ = 0.73.
We see that calibration methods that lack class-speciﬁc bias parameters (i.e. no calibration, TS and NBVS) can hurt domain adaptation if
source priors are initialized by averaging true labels rather than the predicted probabilities. A bold value in a pair is signiﬁcantly better
than the non-bold value according to a paired Wilcoxon test at p ≤0.01. See Sec. 4.1 for details on the experimental setup.
B. Calibration Quality Comparison
We ﬁnd that bias-corrected versions of Temperature Scaling (namely Bias-Corrected Temperature Scaling and Vector
Scaling) tend to yield the best Negative Log Likelihood on an unshifted test set, even if they do not always yield the best
ECE. Results are shown in the tables below.
Calibration
Method
NLL
ECE
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
None
0.299; 4.0
0.299; 4.0
0.299; 4.0
2.696; 4.0
2.696; 4.0
2.696; 4.0
TS
0.292; 3.0
0.292; 3.0
0.292; 3.0
1.074; 1.0
1.029; 2.0
0.996; 3.0
NBVS
0.277; 2.0
0.276; 2.0
0.276; 2.0
1.09; 1.5
0.997; 1.5
0.932; 1.5
BCTS
0.274; 0.0
0.273; 1.0
0.272; 1.0
1.046; 1.0
0.963; 1.0
0.921; 1.0
VS
0.276; 1.0
0.274; 0.5
0.272; 0.0
1.175; 2.5
1.022; 2.0
0.966; 1.0
Table B.1. CIFAR10: NLL and ECE for different calibration methods. Metrics were computed on a test set that had the same
distribution as the validation set. Value before the semicolon is the median of the metric over all the runs. Value after the semicolon is the
median rank of the method relative to other methods in the column. n indicates the number of examples used for calibratin. Bold values
in a column are not signiﬁcantly different from the best performing method in the column, as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at
p ≤0.01. See Sec. 4.1 for details on the experimental setup.

--- Page 13 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Calibration
Method
NLL
ECE
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
None
1.727; 4.0
1.727; 4.0
1.727; 4.0
19.999; 4.0
19.999; 4.0
19.999; 4.0
TS
1.281; 3.0
1.281; 3.0
1.281; 3.0
3.149; 3.0
3.156; 3.0
3.184; 3.0
NBVS
1.236; 2.0
1.235; 2.0
1.234; 2.0
2.291; 0.0
2.289; 0.0
2.344; 0.0
BCTS
1.23; 1.0
1.228; 1.0
1.227; 1.0
2.91; 2.0
2.943; 2.0
2.918; 2.0
VS
1.229; 0.0
1.225; 0.0
1.224; 0.0
2.495; 1.0
2.501; 1.0
2.474; 1.0
Table B.2. CIFAR100: NLL and ECE for different calibration methods. Analogous to Table B.1.
Calibration
Method
NLL
ECE
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
None
0.641; 4.0
0.64; 4.0
0.638; 4.0
8.738; 4.0
8.746; 4.0
8.745; 4.0
TS
0.57; 3.0
0.57; 3.0
0.568; 3.0
3.636; 3.0
3.749; 3.0
3.872; 3.0
NBVS
0.542; 2.0
0.54; 2.0
0.539; 2.0
1.956; 0.0
2.012; 1.0
2.047; 1.0
BCTS
0.513; 0.0
0.511; 1.0
0.509; 1.0
2.157; 1.0
2.135; 1.0
2.08; 1.0
VS
0.518; 1.0
0.512; 0.0
0.509; 0.0
2.187; 1.0
2.006; 1.0
2.014; 1.0
Table B.3. Kaggle Diabetic Retinopathy Detection: NLL and ECE for different calibration methods. Analogous to Table B.1.
C. CIFAR10 Supplementary Tables
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.01
ρ = 0.9
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.75; 3.0
0.825; 3.0
0.813; 3.0
16.025; 4.0
15.837; 4.0
15.944; 4.0
EM
TS
0.775; 3.0
0.812; 3.0
0.862; 3.0
16.675; 3.0
16.412; 3.0
16.45; 3.0
EM
NBVS
1.1; 1.0
1.162; 2.0
1.169; 2.0
17.1; 2.0
17.062; 2.0
17.244; 2.0
EM
BCTS
1.2; 1.0
1.25; 1.0
1.194; 1.0
17.3; 1.0
17.025; 1.0
17.362; 1.0
EM
VS
1.2; 1.0
1.275; 1.0
1.212; 1.0
17.125; 1.0
17.225; 1.0
17.419; 0.0
Table C.1. CIFAR10: Comparison of calibration methods when using EM adaptation to “tweak-one” shift, with ∆%accuracy as
the metric. Analogous to Table 5.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.01049; 15.0
0.00763; 15.0
0.00795; 15.0
0.00283; 15.0
0.00202; 15.0
0.00147; 15.0
0.00191; 12.0
0.001; 10.0
0.0006; 14.0
EM
TS
0.00944; 15.0
0.00705; 15.0
0.00693; 15.0
0.00262; 14.0
0.00192; 15.0
0.00148; 15.0
0.00195; 13.0
0.00101; 13.0
0.00058; 14.0
EM
NBVS
0.0014; 2.0
0.00106; 2.0
0.00075; 4.0
0.00133; 2.0
0.00071; 2.0
0.00043; 3.0
0.00161; 6.0
0.00079; 4.5
0.00047; 6.0
EM
BCTS
0.00037; 1.0
0.00034; 1.0
0.00022; 1.0
0.00126; 1.0
0.00071; 2.0
0.00043; 2.0
0.00161; 6.0
0.00077; 4.0
0.00047; 5.5
EM
VS
0.00061; 1.0
0.00031; 1.0
0.0002; 1.0
0.00118; 1.0
0.00067; 2.0
0.0004; 1.5
0.00167; 6.0
0.00076; 4.5
0.00045; 6.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.00443; 13.0
0.00214; 13.0
0.00125; 13.0
0.00266; 14.0
0.00135; 14.0
0.00074; 13.0
0.00244; 15.0
0.00123; 15.0
0.00055; 13.0
BBSL-soft
None
0.00309; 9.0
0.00133; 9.0
0.00092; 9.0
0.00188; 9.0
0.00108; 9.0
0.00057; 7.5
0.00187; 9.0
0.0009; 9.0
0.00047; 9.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.0031; 8.0
0.00132; 7.0
0.00091; 8.0
0.00191; 10.0
0.00102; 8.0
0.0006; 8.0
0.00179; 7.0
0.00095; 10.0
0.00048; 9.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.0028; 9.0
0.00137; 8.0
0.00098; 8.0
0.00175; 8.0
0.00096; 7.0
0.00061; 7.0
0.00179; 7.0
0.00081; 7.0
0.00048; 7.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.00288; 9.0
0.00126; 7.0
0.00104; 8.0
0.00171; 8.0
0.00102; 8.0
0.0006; 7.0
0.00176; 7.0
0.00083; 8.0
0.00048; 7.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.00306; 9.0
0.00134; 9.0
0.00103; 8.0
0.00173; 8.0
0.00102; 7.0
0.00061; 7.0
0.00172; 7.0
0.00082; 7.0
0.00047; 7.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.00405; 13.0
0.00209; 13.0
0.00124; 12.0
0.00265; 13.0
0.00135; 13.0
0.00074; 13.0
0.00244; 15.0
0.00123; 15.0
0.00055; 13.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.00316; 9.0
0.00127; 8.5
0.0009; 8.0
0.00183; 10.0
0.00108; 10.0
0.00057; 8.0
0.00187; 8.5
0.0009; 9.0
0.00047; 9.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.00312; 8.0
0.00125; 7.0
0.0009; 7.0
0.00186; 9.0
0.00102; 8.0
0.0006; 8.0
0.00179; 7.0
0.00095; 9.0
0.00048; 9.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.00275; 8.0
0.00131; 8.0
0.00094; 7.5
0.00168; 7.0
0.00096; 7.0
0.00061; 7.5
0.00179; 7.0
0.00081; 7.0
0.00048; 7.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.00284; 7.0
0.00124; 7.0
0.00093; 7.0
0.00169; 8.0
0.00102; 8.0
0.0006; 7.0
0.00176; 7.0
0.00083; 8.0
0.00048; 7.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.00298; 7.5
0.00133; 8.0
0.00091; 8.0
0.00171; 7.0
0.00102; 7.0
0.00061; 7.0
0.00172; 7.0
0.00082; 7.0
0.00047; 7.0
Table C.2. CIFAR10: Comparison of all calibration and domain adaptation methods, using MSE (Sec. 3.5) as the metric (dirich-
let shift). Value before the semicolon is the median of the metric over all trials. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of the
domain adaptation + calibration method combination relative to the other method combinations in the column. Bold values in a column
are not signiﬁcantly different from the best-performing method in the column as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01. EM
with BCTS or VS tends to achieve the best performance. See Sec. 4.1 for details on the experimental setup.

--- Page 14 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.01
ρ = 0.9
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.00177; 13.0
0.00094; 13.0
0.00066; 15.0
0.04165; 15.0
0.03988; 15.0
0.03791; 15.0
EM
TS
0.00183; 13.0
0.00101; 14.0
0.00071; 15.0
0.04156; 16.0
0.04897; 16.0
0.04237; 16.0
EM
NBVS
0.00139; 3.0
0.0006; 3.0
0.0004; 4.0
0.00274; 2.0
0.00187; 2.0
0.00172; 2.0
EM
BCTS
0.00132; 3.0
0.00058; 2.0
0.00036; 2.0
0.00125; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.00072; 1.0
EM
VS
0.00139; 3.5
0.00057; 2.0
0.00038; 3.5
0.00165; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.00066; 1.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.00228; 15.0
0.001; 15.0
0.00054; 14.0
0.01524; 13.0
0.00834; 13.0
0.00473; 10.0
BBSL-soft
None
0.00148; 9.0
0.00067; 8.0
0.0004; 6.0
0.01356; 11.0
0.00779; 10.0
0.00488; 10.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.00146; 7.0
0.00068; 8.0
0.0004; 6.0
0.01411; 10.0
0.00852; 11.0
0.00565; 12.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.00153; 8.0
0.00073; 7.0
0.00043; 8.0
0.01187; 7.5
0.00636; 7.0
0.00346; 7.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.00152; 8.0
0.00073; 8.0
0.00042; 7.0
0.01189; 8.0
0.00607; 7.0
0.00351; 6.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.00159; 8.0
0.00075; 7.5
0.00043; 9.5
0.0121; 8.0
0.00607; 6.0
0.0033; 5.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.00228; 15.0
0.001; 14.0
0.00054; 13.0
0.01347; 13.0
0.00815; 13.0
0.00476; 10.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.00148; 9.0
0.00067; 8.0
0.0004; 6.0
0.01355; 10.0
0.00779; 11.0
0.00488; 11.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.00146; 7.5
0.00068; 7.0
0.0004; 5.0
0.01368; 10.0
0.00832; 12.0
0.00565; 13.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.00153; 8.0
0.00073; 7.0
0.00043; 7.0
0.01155; 8.0
0.00626; 7.0
0.00343; 8.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.00152; 7.0
0.00073; 8.0
0.00042; 7.0
0.01178; 7.0
0.00601; 7.0
0.00337; 7.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.00159; 7.0
0.00075; 7.0
0.00043; 9.0
0.01218; 7.0
0.00598; 6.0
0.00326; 6.0
Table C.3. CIFAR10: Comparison of all calibration and domain adaptation methods, using MSE (Sec. 3.5) as the metric (“tweak-
one” shift). Value before the semicolon is the median of the metric over all trials. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of the
domain adaptation + calibration method combination relative to the other method combinations in the column. Bold values in a column
are not signiﬁcantly different from the best-performing method in the column as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01. EM
with BCTS or VS tends to achieve the best performance. See Sec. 4.1 for details on the experimental setup.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.01
ρ = 0.9
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.00177; 2.0
0.00094; 2.0
0.00066; 4.0
0.04165; 4.0
0.03988; 4.0
0.03791; 4.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.00228; 3.0
0.001; 3.0
0.00054; 3.0
0.01524; 2.0
0.00834; 2.0
0.00473; 1.5
BBSL-soft
None
0.00148; 1.0
0.00067; 1.0
0.0004; 1.0
0.01356; 1.0
0.00779; 1.0
0.00488; 2.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.00228; 3.0
0.001; 3.0
0.00054; 3.0
0.01347; 2.0
0.00815; 2.0
0.00476; 1.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.00148; 1.0
0.00067; 1.0
0.0004; 1.0
0.01355; 1.0
0.00779; 1.0
0.00488; 2.0
EM
TS
0.00183; 2.0
0.00101; 2.0
0.00071; 2.0
0.04156; 2.0
0.04897; 2.0
0.04237; 2.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.00146; 1.0
0.00068; 1.0
0.0004; 1.0
0.01411; 1.0
0.00852; 0.0
0.00565; 0.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.00146; 1.0
0.00068; 0.0
0.0004; 0.0
0.01368; 1.0
0.00832; 1.0
0.00565; 1.0
EM
NBVS
0.00139; 0.0
0.0006; 0.0
0.0004; 0.0
0.00274; 0.0
0.00187; 0.0
0.00172; 0.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.00153; 2.0
0.00073; 1.0
0.00043; 1.0
0.01187; 1.0
0.00636; 1.0
0.00346; 1.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.00153; 1.0
0.00073; 1.0
0.00043; 1.0
0.01155; 2.0
0.00626; 2.0
0.00343; 2.0
EM
BCTS
0.00132; 0.0
0.00058; 0.0
0.00036; 0.0
0.00125; 0.0
0.00083; 0.0
0.00072; 0.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.00152; 1.5
0.00073; 1.0
0.00042; 2.0
0.01189; 1.0
0.00607; 1.0
0.00351; 1.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.00152; 1.0
0.00073; 1.0
0.00042; 1.0
0.01178; 2.0
0.00601; 2.0
0.00337; 2.0
EM
VS
0.00139; 0.0
0.00057; 0.0
0.00038; 0.0
0.00165; 0.0
0.00083; 0.0
0.00066; 0.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.00159; 2.0
0.00075; 1.0
0.00043; 2.0
0.0121; 1.0
0.00607; 1.0
0.0033; 1.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.00159; 1.0
0.00075; 1.0
0.00043; 1.0
0.01218; 2.0
0.00598; 2.0
0.00326; 2.0
Table C.4. CIFAR10: Comparison of EM, BBSL and RLLS (“tweak-one” shift) using MSE as the metric. Analogous to Table 1,
but with tweak-one shift instead of dirichlet shift.

--- Page 15 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
D. MNIST Tables
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.00438; 13.0
0.00294; 6.0
0.00227; 13.0
0.00339; 16.0
0.00256; 16.0
0.00207; 16.0
0.00217; 15.0
0.00133; 16.0
0.00093; 16.0
EM
TS
0.00322; 5.5
0.00195; 4.0
0.00189; 9.5
0.00203; 5.0
0.00102; 5.0
0.00084; 10.5
0.00158; 7.5
0.00081; 7.0
0.00052; 8.0
EM
NBVS
0.00144; 2.0
0.00104; 2.0
0.00085; 2.0
0.00167; 3.0
0.00094; 2.0
0.0007; 3.0
0.00165; 8.5
0.00081; 6.5
0.00051; 6.5
EM
BCTS
0.00085; 1.0
0.00057; 1.0
0.0004; 1.0
0.00165; 2.0
0.00093; 2.0
0.0007; 3.0
0.00157; 5.0
0.0008; 4.0
0.00049; 4.0
EM
VS
0.00087; 1.0
0.00056; 1.0
0.00035; 1.0
0.00172; 2.0
0.00095; 2.0
0.00073; 3.0
0.00156; 8.0
0.0008; 7.0
0.00054; 7.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.00491; 13.0
0.0036; 11.0
0.00244; 12.5
0.00276; 14.0
0.00167; 14.0
0.00125; 14.0
0.00208; 15.0
0.00106; 14.0
0.00073; 15.0
BBSL-soft
None
0.00459; 10.0
0.00324; 11.0
0.00213; 10.5
0.00227; 9.0
0.00137; 9.0
0.00085; 9.0
0.00174; 9.0
0.00083; 9.0
0.00052; 7.5
BBSL-soft
TS
0.00417; 9.0
0.00309; 9.0
0.00218; 8.0
0.00232; 7.0
0.00129; 6.0
0.00083; 7.0
0.00157; 5.0
0.00079; 6.0
0.00049; 5.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.00428; 10.5
0.00306; 10.0
0.0022; 10.0
0.00234; 8.0
0.00129; 7.5
0.00082; 7.0
0.00171; 7.0
0.00085; 7.5
0.00052; 7.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.00413; 10.0
0.00303; 10.0
0.00228; 9.0
0.00228; 8.0
0.0013; 8.0
0.00081; 6.0
0.00168; 6.0
0.00083; 6.5
0.0005; 6.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.0039; 9.0
0.00322; 9.5
0.00221; 10.0
0.0022; 9.0
0.00136; 9.0
0.00085; 9.0
0.00163; 8.0
0.00084; 7.0
0.00054; 9.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.00472; 13.0
0.00347; 10.5
0.00238; 12.0
0.00271; 13.5
0.00167; 14.0
0.00125; 13.0
0.00208; 14.0
0.00106; 14.0
0.00073; 14.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.0044; 9.0
0.00314; 10.0
0.00211; 9.0
0.00226; 9.0
0.00137; 10.0
0.00085; 9.0
0.00174; 9.0
0.00083; 10.0
0.00052; 8.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.00407; 8.0
0.00289; 8.0
0.00206; 8.0
0.00232; 7.0
0.00129; 7.0
0.00083; 7.0
0.00157; 5.0
0.00079; 6.0
0.00049; 5.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.00409; 9.0
0.00284; 9.0
0.00211; 9.0
0.00232; 9.0
0.00129; 8.0
0.00082; 7.0
0.00171; 7.0
0.00085; 8.0
0.00052; 8.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.00399; 8.0
0.00283; 8.0
0.00213; 8.0
0.00226; 7.5
0.0013; 8.0
0.00082; 6.0
0.00168; 6.5
0.00083; 6.0
0.0005; 6.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.00385; 8.0
0.00282; 8.0
0.00212; 9.0
0.0022; 8.5
0.00136; 9.0
0.00085; 9.0
0.00163; 8.0
0.00084; 8.0
0.00054; 9.0
Table D.1. MNIST: Comparison of all calibration and domain adaptation methods, using MSE (Sec. 3.5) as the metric (dirichlet
shift). Value before the semicolon is the median of the metric over all trials. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of the domain
adaptation + calibration method combination relative to the other method combinations in the column. Bold values in a column are not
signiﬁcantly different from the best-performing method in the column as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01. EM with BCTS
or VS tends to achieve the best performance, particularly for larger amounts of shift (corresponding to smaller α). See Sec. 4.1 for details
on the experimental setup.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.01
ρ = 0.9
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.00197; 14.0
0.00107; 14.0
0.00067; 14.0
0.00584; 11.0
0.00305; 5.0
0.00316; 12.0
EM
TS
0.00162; 7.0
0.00084; 5.0
0.00054; 3.0
0.00318; 3.0
0.00155; 3.0
0.00085; 3.0
EM
NBVS
0.00158; 5.0
0.00076; 3.5
0.00054; 2.0
0.00112; 2.0
0.00059; 2.0
0.00038; 2.0
EM
BCTS
0.00153; 3.5
0.00076; 3.5
0.00052; 2.0
0.0006; 1.0
0.00037; 0.0
0.00028; 0.0
EM
VS
0.00155; 5.0
0.00076; 3.0
0.00052; 2.0
0.00067; 1.0
0.00042; 1.0
0.00033; 1.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.00197; 15.0
0.00122; 16.0
0.00079; 16.0
0.00897; 15.0
0.00689; 16.0
0.00608; 16.0
BBSL-soft
None
0.00161; 10.0
0.00099; 10.0
0.00057; 11.0
0.00662; 12.0
0.00379; 6.0
0.00298; 5.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.00161; 6.0
0.00091; 6.0
0.00054; 6.0
0.00659; 11.0
0.00395; 10.0
0.00339; 10.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.00162; 9.0
0.00088; 9.0
0.00057; 9.0
0.00607; 10.0
0.00385; 9.0
0.00349; 9.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.00158; 7.0
0.00087; 7.5
0.00055; 7.0
0.00623; 9.0
0.00383; 9.0
0.00338; 8.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.00171; 9.5
0.00086; 9.0
0.00056; 11.0
0.00641; 10.0
0.00407; 11.0
0.00393; 13.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.00197; 15.0
0.00122; 15.0
0.00079; 15.0
0.00868; 14.0
0.00676; 15.0
0.00593; 15.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.00161; 9.0
0.00099; 9.0
0.00057; 10.0
0.00622; 10.0
0.00379; 6.0
0.00298; 5.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.00161; 6.0
0.00091; 6.0
0.00054; 5.0
0.00627; 9.0
0.00393; 9.0
0.00339; 10.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.00162; 8.0
0.00088; 8.0
0.00057; 8.0
0.006; 7.0
0.0038; 9.0
0.00349; 9.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.00158; 6.0
0.00087; 7.0
0.00055; 6.0
0.00603; 7.0
0.00378; 8.0
0.00338; 8.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.00171; 9.0
0.00086; 8.0
0.00056; 10.0
0.00626; 8.0
0.00405; 11.0
0.00393; 13.0
Table D.2. MNIST: Comparison of all calibration and domain adaptation methods, using MSE (Sec. 3.5) as the metric (“tweak-
one” shift). Value before the semicolon is the median of the metric over all trials. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of the
domain adaptation + calibration method combination relative to the other method combinations in the column. Bold values in a column
are not signiﬁcantly different from the best-performing method in the column as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01. EM
with BCTS or VS tends to achieve the best performance. See Sec. 4.1 for details on the experimental setup.

--- Page 16 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
None
0.00438; 2.0
0.00294; 2.0
0.00227; 2.0
0.00339; 4.0
0.00256; 4.0
0.00207; 4.0
0.00217; 4.0
0.00133; 4.0
0.00093; 4.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.00491; 2.0
0.0036; 2.0
0.00244; 2.0
0.00276; 3.0
0.00167; 2.5
0.00125; 3.0
0.00208; 3.0
0.00106; 3.0
0.00073; 3.0
BBSL-soft
None
0.00459; 2.0
0.00324; 2.0
0.00213; 2.0
0.00227; 1.0
0.00137; 1.0
0.00085; 1.0
0.00174; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.00052; 1.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.00472; 2.0
0.00347; 2.0
0.00238; 2.0
0.00271; 2.0
0.00167; 2.0
0.00125; 2.0
0.00208; 2.0
0.00106; 2.0
0.00073; 2.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.0044; 1.0
0.00314; 2.0
0.00211; 1.0
0.00226; 1.0
0.00137; 1.0
0.00085; 1.0
0.00174; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.00052; 0.5
EM
TS
0.00322; 0.0
0.00195; 0.0
0.00189; 1.0
0.00203; 0.0
0.00102; 0.0
0.00084; 2.0
0.00158; 2.0
0.00081; 2.0
0.00052; 2.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.00417; 1.0
0.00309; 1.0
0.00218; 1.0
0.00232; 1.0
0.00129; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.00157; 1.0
0.00079; 1.0
0.00049; 1.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.00407; 1.0
0.00289; 1.0
0.00206; 1.0
0.00232; 1.0
0.00129; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.00157; 1.0
0.00079; 1.0
0.00049; 1.0
EM
NBVS
0.00144; 0.0
0.00104; 0.0
0.00085; 0.0
0.00167; 0.0
0.00094; 0.0
0.0007; 0.0
0.00165; 1.0
0.00081; 0.0
0.00051; 0.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.00428; 1.5
0.00306; 1.0
0.0022; 1.0
0.00234; 1.0
0.00129; 1.0
0.00082; 1.0
0.00171; 1.0
0.00085; 1.0
0.00052; 1.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.00409; 1.0
0.00284; 1.0
0.00211; 1.0
0.00232; 1.0
0.00129; 1.0
0.00082; 1.0
0.00171; 1.0
0.00085; 1.0
0.00052; 1.0
EM
BCTS
0.00085; 0.0
0.00057; 0.0
0.0004; 0.0
0.00165; 0.0
0.00093; 0.0
0.0007; 0.0
0.00157; 0.0
0.0008; 0.0
0.00049; 0.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.00413; 2.0
0.00303; 2.0
0.00228; 2.0
0.00228; 1.0
0.0013; 1.0
0.00081; 1.0
0.00168; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.0005; 1.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.00399; 1.0
0.00283; 1.0
0.00213; 1.0
0.00226; 1.0
0.0013; 1.0
0.00082; 1.0
0.00168; 1.0
0.00083; 1.0
0.0005; 1.0
EM
VS
0.00087; 0.0
0.00056; 0.0
0.00035; 0.0
0.00172; 0.0
0.00095; 0.0
0.00073; 0.0
0.00156; 0.0
0.0008; 0.0
0.00054; 0.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.0039; 2.0
0.00322; 2.0
0.00221; 2.0
0.0022; 1.0
0.00136; 1.0
0.00085; 1.0
0.00163; 1.0
0.00084; 1.0
0.00054; 1.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.00385; 1.0
0.00282; 1.0
0.00212; 1.0
0.0022; 1.0
0.00136; 1.0
0.00085; 1.0
0.00163; 1.0
0.00084; 1.0
0.00054; 1.0
Table D.3. MNIST: Comparison of EM, BBSL and RLLS (dirichlet shift). Analogous to Table 2, but with dirichlet shift rather than
tweak-one shift.
E. CIFAR100 Supplementary Tables
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10.0
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
EM
None
1.80113; 16.0
1.67187; 16.0
1.7157; 16.0
0.55795; 16.0
0.54112; 16.0
0.55955; 16.0
0.3896; 16.0
0.37585; 16.0
0.36337; 16.0
EM
TS
0.41127; 9.0
0.34963; 7.0
0.30451; 6.5
0.23803; 13.0
0.21715; 13.0
0.19781; 13.0
0.16408; 12.0
0.14477; 13.0
0.13852; 13.0
EM
NBVS
0.1637; 2.0
0.15904; 2.0
0.14348; 2.0
0.1042; 2.0
0.10523; 2.0
0.10777; 6.0
0.10122; 4.5
0.09874; 7.0
0.09729; 10.0
EM
BCTS
0.1101; 2.0
0.10824; 2.0
0.11636; 2.0
0.08838; 2.0
0.09102; 2.0
0.0876; 3.0
0.09207; 2.0
0.08707; 5.0
0.08781; 8.0
EM
VS
0.09485; 1.0
0.08792; 1.0
0.0862; 1.0
0.07684; 1.0
0.07922; 1.0
0.07773; 2.0
0.09387; 2.0
0.08796; 5.5
0.08981; 9.0
BBSL-hard
None
0.83095; 15.0
0.68099; 15.0
0.58656; 15.0
0.33542; 15.0
0.27998; 15.0
0.24659; 15.0
0.25694; 15.0
0.21736; 15.0
0.20637; 15.0
BBSL-soft
None
0.5279; 13.0
0.47521; 12.0
0.44263; 13.0
0.23637; 13.0
0.21324; 13.0
0.18605; 13.0
0.18842; 13.0
0.16108; 13.0
0.14018; 13.0
BBSL-soft
TS
0.40279; 9.0
0.34713; 9.0
0.33012; 9.0
0.18774; 9.5
0.15665; 9.0
0.12639; 9.0
0.13409; 8.5
0.10951; 7.0
0.09703; 7.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
0.40856; 10.0
0.33122; 9.0
0.29594; 9.0
0.17545; 9.0
0.1409; 9.0
0.11336; 8.0
0.13601; 9.0
0.113; 8.0
0.09731; 7.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
0.40887; 9.0
0.32629; 9.0
0.30435; 9.0
0.17923; 9.0
0.14756; 9.0
0.11536; 9.0
0.13698; 9.0
0.11267; 8.0
0.09748; 7.0
BBSL-soft
VS
0.43085; 9.0
0.3216; 8.0
0.30221; 9.0
0.16715; 8.0
0.13847; 8.0
0.11169; 7.0
0.13075; 8.0
0.10971; 7.0
0.09433; 6.0
RLLS-hard
None
0.4577; 12.0
0.38413; 12.0
0.37675; 12.0
0.20285; 12.0
0.16017; 12.0
0.14228; 12.0
0.16412; 12.0
0.13842; 13.0
0.12127; 12.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.33882; 8.0
0.2728; 8.0
0.2878; 8.0
0.13859; 8.0
0.12697; 7.0
0.10567; 8.0
0.12528; 8.0
0.11011; 8.5
0.10056; 8.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.27236; 6.0
0.22426; 6.0
0.22697; 5.5
0.12255; 5.0
0.10639; 5.0
0.08221; 4.0
0.11395; 5.0
0.08803; 5.0
0.07868; 4.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.2797; 7.0
0.21465; 5.0
0.23037; 5.0
0.11469; 4.0
0.09903; 4.0
0.08341; 4.0
0.11303; 5.0
0.08868; 4.0
0.07531; 4.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.26594; 6.0
0.2305; 6.0
0.23604; 6.0
0.11498; 5.0
0.09755; 4.0
0.08309; 4.0
0.1085; 4.0
0.08672; 3.0
0.07252; 3.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.28941; 6.0
0.21363; 6.0
0.22405; 6.0
0.11627; 5.0
0.09894; 4.0
0.08267; 3.0
0.11426; 4.0
0.08623; 4.0
0.07414; 3.0
Table E.1. CIFAR100: Comparison of all calibration and domain adaptation methods, using MSE (Sec.
3.5) as the metric
(dirichlet shift). Value before the semicolon is the median of the metric over all trials. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of the
domain adaptation + calibration method combination relative to the other method combinations in the column. Bold values in a column
are not signiﬁcantly different from the best-performing method in the column as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01. EM
with VS tends to achieve the best performance, particularly for larger amounts of shift (corresponding to smaller α). See Sec. 4.1 for
details on the experimental setup.

--- Page 17 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
F. Diabetic Retinopathy Supplementary Tables
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.9
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
EM
None
0.35073; 3.5
0.30498; 4.0
0.19709; 3.0
0.0899; 10.0
0.0596; 12.0
0.05666; 13.0
EM
TS
0.47048; 3.0
0.29683; 3.0
0.20944; 2.0
0.08077; 11.0
0.05537; 12.0
0.05268; 13.0
EM
NBVS
0.51515; 5.0
0.33256; 4.0
0.24066; 4.0
0.09137; 12.0
0.08415; 14.0
0.08002; 15.0
EM
BCTS
0.40245; 3.5
0.2475; 3.0
0.19461; 3.0
0.02267; 2.5
0.01354; 2.5
0.01043; 3.0
EM
VS
0.53081; 5.0
0.26442; 4.0
0.21641; 4.0
0.02388; 3.0
0.01307; 2.0
0.00953; 2.0
BBSL-hard
None
1.83879; 15.0
1.4584; 15.0
0.81962; 15.0
0.31856; 16.0
0.10582; 15.0
0.0491; 13.5
BBSL-soft
None
1.4041; 11.0
0.71345; 10.5
0.43408; 10.0
0.10441; 12.0
0.04494; 11.0
0.02562; 10.0
BBSL-soft
TS
1.26587; 10.0
0.57077; 9.0
0.38372; 9.0
0.09552; 11.0
0.03859; 10.0
0.02165; 9.0
BBSL-soft
NBVS
1.62832; 12.0
0.70875; 10.5
0.45962; 11.0
0.09014; 10.0
0.03608; 10.0
0.01769; 8.0
BBSL-soft
BCTS
1.40016; 12.0
0.52628; 9.0
0.46372; 10.0
0.05524; 8.0
0.02529; 6.0
0.01419; 6.0
BBSL-soft
VS
1.36527; 11.0
0.50393; 10.0
0.48291; 10.0
0.04678; 7.0
0.02485; 6.0
0.01543; 6.0
RLLS-hard
None
1.07889; 10.0
1.08159; 14.0
0.74669; 13.5
0.05118; 7.0
0.02865; 7.0
0.02458; 8.0
RLLS-soft
None
0.91948; 8.0
0.63483; 9.0
0.41057; 7.0
0.03602; 6.0
0.0225; 6.0
0.02351; 7.0
RLLS-soft
TS
0.80812; 7.5
0.56293; 8.0
0.37624; 8.0
0.0352; 6.0
0.02457; 7.0
0.02054; 7.0
RLLS-soft
NBVS
0.77171; 7.0
0.56492; 7.0
0.40272; 9.0
0.04301; 7.0
0.03258; 8.0
0.02541; 8.0
RLLS-soft
BCTS
0.87398; 8.0
0.50668; 7.5
0.42255; 9.0
0.0384; 6.0
0.02826; 6.0
0.02245; 6.0
RLLS-soft
VS
0.82992; 7.0
0.47802; 7.0
0.42028; 8.5
0.04096; 6.0
0.02948; 7.0
0.022; 6.0
Table F.1. Kaggle Diabetic Retinopathy Detection: Comparison of all calibration and domain adaptation methods, using MSE
(Sec. 3.5) as the metric. ρ represents the porportion of healthy examples in the sfhited domain; the source distribution has ρ = 0.73.
Value before the semicolon is the median of the metric over all trials. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of the domain
adaptation + calibration method combination relative to the other method combinations in the column. Bold values in a column are not
signiﬁcantly different from the best-performing method in the column as measured by a paired Wilcoxon test at p < 0.01. See Sec. 4.1
for details on the experimental setup.
G. NLL Corresponds Better To Beneﬁts In Label Shift Adaptation
To investigate whether NLL or ECE corresponded better to the beneﬁts offered by a calibration method in the context of
label shift adaptation, we adopted the following strategy: in a given experimental run, we identiﬁed the calibration method
that provided the best NLL (or ECE) on the unshifted test set. We then looked at the performance of label shift adaptation
using this calibration method. Note that the calibration method selected can differ from one run to the next. Across datasets,
we observed that, by and large, selecting a calibration method according to the NLL produced better performance after
domain adaptation as compared to selecting a calibration method according to ECE. Results are show in the tables below.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
Best NLL
5.9; 0.0
5.775; 0.0
5.75; 0.0
2.15; 0.0
2.075; 0.0
2.081; 0.0
0.725; 0.0
0.8; 0.0
0.838; 0.0
EM
Best ECE
5.675; 1.0
5.85; 1.0
5.744; 1.0
2.15; 1.0
1.713; 1.0
1.775; 1.0
0.75; 1.0
0.188; 1.0
0.244; 1.0
Table G.1. CIFAR10: NLL vs ECE, ∆%Accuracy, dirichlet shift. Entry in “calibration method” column indicates how the calibration
method for any given run was selected: either according to whether it produced the best NLL or whether it produced the best ECE,
where NLL and ECE were calculated on the unshifted test set. Value before the semicolon is the median change in %accuracy relative to
unadapted predictions. Value after the semicolon is the median rank of the given metric relative to the other metric in the pair. A bold
value is signiﬁcantly better than the non-bold value in the pair using a paired Wilcoxon test at p ≤0.01. See Sec. 4.1 for details on the
experimental setup.

--- Page 18 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.01
ρ = 0.9
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
Best NLL
1.25; 0.0
1.262; 0.0
1.225; 0.0
17.3; 0.0
17.025; 0.0
17.362; 0.0
EM
Best ECE
1.05; 1.0
1.088; 1.0
1.137; 1.0
17.125; 1.0
16.412; 1.0
16.45; 1.0
Table G.2. CIFAR10: NLL vs. ECE, metric: ∆%accuracy, “tweak-one” shift. Analogous to Table G.1. The “tweak-one” shift
strategy is explained in Sec. 4.1.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
Best NLL
0.04654; 0.0
0.03934; 0.0
0.02037; 0.0
0.1262; 0.0
0.07123; 0.0
0.04254; 0.0
0.1609; 0.5
0.07719; 0.0
0.04652; 0.0
EM
Best ECE
0.14529; 1.0
0.08345; 1.0
0.04786; 1.0
0.118; 1.0
0.19194; 1.0
0.1479; 1.0
0.16718; 0.5
0.10077; 1.0
0.05845; 1.0
BBSL-soft
Best NLL
0.28846; 0.0
0.13062; 0.0
0.10355; 0.0
0.17072; 1.0
0.10215; 0.5
0.06013; 0.0
0.17633; 1.0
0.0825; 0.0
0.04782; 0.0
BBSL-soft
Best ECE
0.27553; 1.0
0.13608; 1.0
0.10031; 1.0
0.17342; 0.0
0.1021; 0.5
0.05966; 1.0
0.17173; 0.0
0.09483; 1.0
0.04756; 1.0
RLLS-soft
Best NLL
0.28416; 0.0
0.13019; 0.0
0.08999; 0.0
0.16909; 1.0
0.10211; 0.5
0.06013; 0.0
0.17633; 1.0
0.0825; 0.0
0.04782; 0.0
RLLS-soft
Best ECE
0.27631; 1.0
0.13053; 1.0
0.09304; 1.0
0.17087; 0.0
0.1021; 0.5
0.05977; 1.0
0.17173; 0.0
0.09483; 1.0
0.04756; 1.0
Table G.3. CIFAR10: NLL vs. ECE, metric: MSE, dirichlet shift. Analogous to Table G.1, but using MSE (Sec. 3.5) as the metric
rather than change in %accuracy.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.01
ρ = 0.9
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
n=2000
n=4000
n=8000
EM
Best NLL
0.13671; 0.0
0.05747; 0.0
0.03794; 0.0
0.12478; 0.0
0.08311; 0.0
0.07207; 0.0
EM
Best ECE
0.14919; 1.0
0.06362; 1.0
0.04005; 1.0
0.16472; 1.0
4.89671; 1.0
4.23677; 1.0
BBSL-soft
Best NLL
0.15212; 0.0
0.07357; 1.0
0.04304; 1.0
1.18879; 1.0
0.60651; 0.0
0.35089; 0.0
BBSL-soft
Best ECE
0.14834; 1.0
0.07226; 0.0
0.04296; 0.0
1.21037; 0.0
0.85178; 1.0
0.5647; 1.0
RLLS-soft
Best NLL
0.15212; 0.0
0.07357; 1.0
0.04304; 1.0
1.17799; 1.0
0.60084; 0.0
0.337; 0.0
RLLS-soft
Best ECE
0.14834; 1.0
0.07226; 0.0
0.04296; 0.0
1.21754; 0.0
0.83205; 1.0
0.5647; 1.0
Table G.4. CIFAR10: NLL vs ECE, metric: MSE, “tweak-one” shift. Analogous to Table G.1.
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10.0
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
EM
Best NLL
24.829; 0.0
24.518; 0.0
24.51; 0.0
21.3; 0.0
21.629; 0.0
21.93; 0.0
21.229; 0.0
21.306; 0.0
21.21; 0.0
EM
Best ECE
24.079; 1.0
24.053; 1.0
24.575; 1.0
20.986; 1.0
21.382; 1.0
21.53; 1.0
21.05; 1.0
20.971; 1.0
21.06; 1.0
Table G.5. CIFAR100: NLL vs ECE, metric: ∆%Accuracy, dirichlet shift. Analogous to Table G.1
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
α = 0.1
α = 1.0
α = 10.0
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
n=7000
n=8500
n=10000
EM
Best NLL
0.09485; 0.0
0.08792; 0.0
0.0862; 0.0
0.07684; 0.0
0.07922; 0.0
0.07773; 0.0
0.09307; 0.0
0.0868; 0.0
0.08981; 0.0
EM
Best ECE
0.1637; 1.0
0.15904; 1.0
0.14348; 1.0
0.1042; 1.0
0.10523; 1.0
0.10777; 1.0
0.10042; 1.0
0.0966; 1.0
0.09683; 1.0
BBSL-soft
Best NLL
0.43085; 0.0
0.3216; 0.0
0.30221; 0.0
0.16715; 0.0
0.13847; 0.0
0.11169; 0.0
0.13481; 0.0
0.11224; 0.0
0.09433; 0.0
BBSL-soft
Best ECE
0.40856; 1.0
0.33122; 1.0
0.29594; 1.0
0.17545; 1.0
0.1409; 1.0
0.11336; 1.0
0.13601; 1.0
0.113; 1.0
0.09731; 1.0
RLLS-soft
Best NLL
0.28941; 0.5
0.21363; 1.0
0.22405; 1.0
0.11627; 0.0
0.09894; 1.0
0.08267; 0.0
0.11264; 0.0
0.08623; 0.0
0.07414; 0.0
RLLS-soft
Best ECE
0.2797; 0.5
0.21465; 0.0
0.23037; 0.0
0.11469; 1.0
0.09903; 0.0
0.08341; 1.0
0.11303; 1.0
0.08868; 1.0
0.07531; 1.0
Table G.6. CIFAR100: NLL vs ECE, metric: MSE, dirichlet shift. Analogous to Table G.1
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.9
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
EM
Best NLL
3.8; 0.0
4.5; 0.0
4.6; 0.0
3.6; 0.0
3.6; 0.0
3.733; 0.0
EM
Best ECE
3.6; 1.0
4.4; 1.0
4.3; 1.0
2.2; 1.0
3.6; 1.0
2.467; 1.0
Table G.7. KaggleDR: NLL vs ECE, metric: ∆%Accuracy. Shift strategy modiﬁes the proportion of healthy examples. Analogous to
Table G.1

--- Page 19 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
Shift
Estimator
Calibration
Method
ρ = 0.5
ρ = 0.9
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
n=500
n=1000
n=1500
EM
Best NLL
0.437; 0.0
0.242; 0.0
0.21; 0.0
0.023; 0.0
0.013; 0.0
0.01; 0.0
EM
Best ECE
0.485; 1.0
0.329; 1.0
0.225; 1.0
0.091; 1.0
0.013; 1.0
0.08; 1.0
BBSL-soft
Best NLL
1.4; 0.0
0.554; 0.0
0.486; 0.0
0.055; 0.0
0.025; 0.0
0.015; 0.0
BBSL-soft
Best ECE
1.498; 1.0
0.682; 1.0
0.416; 1.0
0.09; 1.0
0.025; 1.0
0.018; 1.0
RLLS-soft
Best NLL
0.907; 0.0
0.5; 0.0
0.404; 0.0
0.038; 0.0
0.029; 0.0
0.022; 0.0
RLLS-soft
Best ECE
0.835; 1.0
0.551; 1.0
0.403; 1.0
0.043; 1.0
0.029; 1.0
0.025; 1.0
Table G.8. KaggleDR: NLL vs ECE, metric: MSE. Shift strategy modiﬁes the proportion of healthy examples. Analogous to Table
G.1
H. Proof that EM Converges to a Stationary Point of the Likelihood Function
We slightly modify the derivation of Theorem 2 of Wu (1983), which states that (given certain conditions) continuity of the
conditional expectation Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) in q(ω) and q(s)(ω) implies that the sequence of parameter estimates produced by
EM converges to a stationary point of the likelihood. The reason we do not directly invoke Theorem 2 of Wu (1983) is that its
proof assumes that the conditional expectation Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) is deﬁned at all points in the domain of the log-likelihood.
In our application, Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) can be undeﬁned when q(ω) is at the boundary of the domain - however, in spite of
this, we observe that it is still possible to prove that EM converges to a stationary point of the log-likelihood.
The proof proceeds as follows: in Sec. H.1, we review the deﬁnition of the likelihood and recap key properties of
Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)). In Sec. H.2, we verify that certain conditions assumed in Wu (1983) hold for the case of domain
adaptation to label shift. In Sec. H.3, we identify the domain of Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) and prove differentiability over this
domain. Finally, in Sec. H.4, we will invoke Theorem 1 of Wu (1983) to show that EM converges to a stationary point of the
likelihood. Together with the concavity of the likelihood, this is sufﬁcient to guarantee convergence to a global maximum.
H.1. Review of Likelihood and Key Properties of Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω))
We will begin by recapping certain deﬁnitions and expressions that will be useful later in the proof. Let ωi denote membership
in class i, and let q(ωi) and p(ωi) denote the target & source domain priors. Using the form of the log-likelihood derived in
Eqn. 3 in the main text, we have:
L(q(ω)) =
X
k
log
 X
i
q(xk|ωi)q(ωi)
!
=
X
k
log
 X
i
p(xk|ωi)q(ωi)
!
(By the label shift assumption)
Let q(s)(ωi|xk) denote the conditional probability that xk originated from class i given the estimate q(s)(ω) of the priors at
EM iteration s. The expression for q(s)(ωi|xk) in terms of q(s)(ωi) can be found in equation A.4 of Saerens 2002:
q(s)(ωi|xk) =
q(s)(ωi)
p(ωi) p(ωi|xk)
Pm
j=1
q(s)(ωj)
p(ωj) p(ωj|xk)
=
q(s)(ωi)p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi) Pm
j=1
q(s)(ωj)
p(ωj) p(ωj|xk)
(9)
Following the standard derivation of EM, we can rewrite the log-likelihood as:
L(q(ω)) =
X
k
log
 X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk)
q(s)(ωi|xk)p(xk|ωi)q(ωi)
!
=
X
k
log

Ei∼q(s)(ωi|xk)

1
q(s)(ωi|xk)p(xk|ωi)q(ωi)

(10)

--- Page 20 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
≥
X
k
Ei∼q(s)(ωi|xk)

log

1
q(s)(ωi|xk)p(xk|ωi)q(ωi)

(By Jensen’s inequality)
=
X
k
X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk) log

1
q(s)(ωi|xk)p(xk|ωi)q(ωi)

=
X
k
X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk) log (p(xk|ωi)q(ωi)) −
X
k
X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk) log

q(s)(ωi|xk)

Let us deﬁne:
Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) :=
X
k
X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk) log (p(xk|ωi)q(ωi))
(11)
This agrees with the deﬁnition of Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) as the conditional expectation of the complete data likelihood given
q(s)(ω); for a derivation, see equation A.5 in Saerens (2002).
Given our deﬁnition of Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)), we can write:
L(q(ω)) ≥Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) −
X
k
X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk) log

q(s)(ωi|xk)

X
k
X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk) log

q(s)(ωi|xk)

≥Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) −L(q(ω))
Let us deﬁne
H(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) := Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) −L(q(ω))
(12)
We have:
X
k
X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk) log

q(s)(ωi|xk)

≥H(q(ω); q(s)(ω))
(13)
When q(s)(ω) = q(ω), the expectation Ei∼q(s)(ωi|xk)
h
1
q(s)(ωi)p(xk|ωi)q(ωi)
i
in (10) becomes Ei∼q(s)(ωi|xk) [p(xk|ωi)],
which is the expectation over a constant-valued random variable. Because Jensen’s inequality holds with equality when the
expectation is taken over a constant-valued random variable, we have:
X
k
X
i
q(s)(ωi|xk) log

q(s)(ωi|xk)

= H(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω))
(14)
Because P
k
P
i q(s)(ωi|xk) log
 q(s)(ωi|xk)

does not depend on q(ω), this implies H(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) is maximized
when q(s)(ω) = q(ω), i.e.
q(s)(ω) = arg max
q(ω)
H(q(ω); q(s)(ω))
(15)
It follows that if we set q(s+1)(ω) to be arg maxq(ω) Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)), we are guaranteed that L(q(s+1)) ≥L(q(s)):
L(q(s+1)(ω)) = Q(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω)) −H(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω))
≥Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) −H(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω)) (From the deﬁnition of q(s+1)(ω))
≥Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) −H(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) (From Eqn. 15)
= L(q(s)(ω))
(16)
The formula for the EM update rule q(s+1)(ω) = arg maxq(ω) Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) can be found in Equation A.8 of Saerens
(2002) and is reproduced below:

--- Page 21 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
q(s+1)(ωi) = 1
N
N
X
k=1
q(s)(ωi|xk)
(17)
where N denotes the number of examples from the target domain and q(s)(ωi|xk) is deﬁned as in (9).
H.2. Verifying Conditions Assumed In Wu (1983)
Given our assumption that p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i, we will show that the conditions assumed in Wu (1983) hold for domain adaptation
to label shift. Let Ωdenote the domain of the log-likelihood function L(q(ω)) = C + P
k log
P
i
p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi) q(ωi)

. The
conditions are:
1. Ωis a subset in d-dimensional Euclidean space Rd
2. Ωqo(ω) = {q(ω) ∈Ω: L(q(ω)) ≥L(qo(ω))} is compact for any L(qo(ω)) > −∞
3. L(q(ω)) is continuous in Ωand differentiable in the interior of Ω
4. The EM starting point q(0)(ω) satisﬁes L(q(0)(ω)) > −∞
5. Each q(s)(ω) (denoting the parameters at EM iteration s) lies in the interior of Ω
We verify each condition in turn.
H.2.1. ΩIS A SUBSET IN d-DIMENSIONAL EUCLIDEAN SPACE Rd
Proof: let d denote the number of classes. Given our assumption that p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i, we observe that the log likelihood
is deﬁned so long as Pd
i=1 p(ωi|xk)q(ωi) > 0 ∀k. Thus, the domain Ωis {q(ω) : q(ωi) ≥0 ∀i, Pd
i=1 q(ωi) =
1, Pd
i=1 p(ωi|xk)q(ωi) > 0 ∀k}, which is a subset of Rd (more speciﬁcally, a subset of the hyperplane deﬁned by
Pd
i=1 q(ωi) = 1).
■
H.2.2. Ωqo(ω) = {q(ω) ∈Ω: L(q(ω)) ≥L(qo(ω))} IS COMPACT FOR ANY L(qo(ω)) > −∞
Proof: for a subset of Euclidean space Rd to be compact, it must be both bounded and closed. The parameter space is
bounded because 0 ≤q(ωi) ≤1 ∀i. To show closedness, we will use proof by contradiction. Assume that there exists
some q(ω) s.t. Ωqo(ω) is open and L(qo(ω)) > −∞. We begin by noting that L(q(ω)) is ﬁnite everywhere in Ω(by
deﬁnition of Ω), and is also continuous everywhere in Ω(proven in Sec. H.2.3). If Ωqo(ω) were open, it would imply that
∃x /∈Ωqo(ω) and a sequence {x′
n} ∈Ωqo(ω) and x′
n →x. From continuity of L(q(ω)) over Ω, we know that if x ∈Ω,
then L(x′
n) ≥L(qo(ω)) ∀n as x′
n →x implies that L(x) ≥L(qo(ω)). In other words, continuity necessitates that if
x ∈Ωand x′
n ∈Ωqo(ω) ∀n, then x ∈Ωqo(ω). Openness of Ωqo(ω) is therefore only possible if ∃x, {x′
n} s.t. x /∈Ωand
x′
n ∈Ωqo(ω) ∀n - in other words, x must exist at an open boundary of Ω. However, the only open boundaries of Ωare
{q(ω) : ∃k s.t. P
i p(ωi|xk)q(ωi) = 0}. We observe that L(q(ω)) →−∞as P
i p(ωi|xk)q(ωi) →0 for any k. The set
Ωqo(ω) can therefore only be open if L(qo(ω)) = −∞, leading to a contradiction.
■
H.2.3. L(q(ω)) IS CONTINUOUS IN ΩAND DIFFERENTIABLE IN THE INTERIOR OF Ω
Proof: because differentiability everywhere in the domain implies continuity in the domain, it sufﬁces to show that L(q(ω))
is differentiable at all points in the domain. The partial derivative of the log-likelihood L is:
∂L(q(ω))
∂q(ωi)
=
X
k
p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi)
P
j
p(ωj|xk)
p(ωj) q(ωj)

(18)
Because we assumed p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i, we note that the derivative is deﬁned as long as P
j p(ωj|xk)q(ωj) > 0 ∀k. As the
latter condition is a requirement for being in the domain Ω(see Sec. H.2.1), we conclude that the log-likelihood L is both
continuous and differentiable everywhere in Ω.
■

--- Page 22 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
H.2.4. THE EM STARTING POINT q(0)(ω) SATISFIES L(q(0)(ω)) > −∞
Proof: we set q(0) to be equal to the source domain probabilities p(ωi). Substituting q(ωi) = p(ωi) into the expression for
the log-likelihood gives:
L(q(0)(ω)) = C +
X
k
log
 X
i
p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi)
p(ωi)
!
= C +
X
k
log
 X
i
p(ωi|xk)
!
= C
As a reminder, C = P
k log(p(xk)) is a constant w.r.t. q(ω) and is therefore ignored when optimizing w.r.t. q(ω).
■
H.2.5. EACH q(s)(ω) (DENOTING THE PARAMETERS AT EM ITERATION s) LIES IN THE INTERIOR OF Ω
We ﬁrst state what it means to for q(s)(ω) to lie in the interior of Ω. Because Ωis a subset of the Euclidean hyperplane
deﬁned by P
i q(ωi) = 1, the interior of Ωconsists of {q(ω) : q(ωi) > 0 ∀i and P
i q(ωi) = 1}. Similarly, the boundary
of Ωconsists of {q(ω) : ∃i s.t. q(ωi) = 0 and P
i q(ωi) = 1}. We will use ∂Ωto denote the boundary of Ωand (Ω\ ∂Ω)
to denote the interior.
We now consider the condition that q(s)(ω) ∈(Ω\ ∂Ω) ∀s.
We ﬁrst show that this condition is satisﬁed when
P
k p(ωi|xk) > 0 ∀i.
Lemma: if P
k p(ωi|xk) > 0 ∀i and p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i, then q(s)(ωi) > 0 ∀i, s.
Proof: Note that P
k p(ωi|xk) > 0 implies that ∃k s.t. p(ωi|xk) > 0. We use proof by induction. The base case is satisﬁed
because q(0)(ω) is initialized to p(ω), which (by assumption) satisﬁes p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i. We now observe that the product
q(s)(ωi)p(ωi|xk) is the numerator of q(s)(ωi|xk) =
q(s)(ωi)p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi) Pm
j=1 q(s)(ωj)p(ωj|xk); thus, q(s)(ωi|xk) > 0 if q(s)(ωi) > 0
and p(ωi|xk) > 0. It therefore follows that q(s+1)(ωi) = 1
N
PN
k=1 q(s)(ωi|xk) > 0 if q(s)(ωi) and ∃k s.t. p(ωi|xk) > 0. ■
We now consider the case where ∃i′ s.t. P
k p(ωi′|xk) = 0. In this case, the condition is not technically satisﬁed because
q(s)(ωi′|xk) = 0 when p(ωi′|xk) = 0, and thus q(s+1)(ωi′) =
1
N
PN
k=1 q(s)(ωi′|xk) would be 0 for all k + 1 > 0.
However, the EM updates in this case would be equivalent to performing EM on a reduced problem where class i′ is
simply excluded from the EM optimization if P
k p(ωi′|xk) = 0. In the reduced problem, we would be guaranteed that
P
k p(ωi|xk) > 0 ∀i, which (as we showed above) ensures that the EM parameters always lie in the interior of the parameter
space.
H.3. Proving Differentiability of Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) over (Ω\ ∂Ω)×Ω
Given our assumption that p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i, we will show that Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) is not only continuous but also differentiable
over (Ω\ ∂Ω)×Ω. Because Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) is a composition of differentiable functions, to prove differentiability over
(Ω\ ∂Ω)×Ωit sufﬁces to show that Q(q(ω); q(s)(ω)) is deﬁned over (Ω\ ∂Ω)×Ω.
Building on the expression for Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) from Eqn. 11, we have:
Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) =
N
X
k=1
m
X
i=1
q(s)(ωi|xk) (log q(ωi) + log p(xk|ωi))
=
N
X
k=1
m
X
i=1
q(s)(ωi|xk)

log q(ωi) + log
p(ωi|xk)p(xk)
p(ωi)

(19)
=
N
X
k=1
m
X
i=1
q(s)(ωi)p(ωi|xk)

log q(ωi) + log
h
p(ωi|xk)p(xk)
p(ωi)
i
p(ωi) Pm
j=1

q(s)(ωj)
p(ωj) p(ωj|xk)

(20)

--- Page 23 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
=
N
X
k=1
m
X
i=1
q(s)(ωi)p(ωi|xk) (log q(ωi) + log p(ωi|xk) + log p(xk) −log p(ωi))
p(ωi) Pm
j=1

q(s)(ωj)
p(ωj) p(ωj|xk)

=
N
X
k=1
m
X
i=1
q(s)(ωi)p(ωi|xk) (log q(ωi) + log p(xk) −log p(ωi)) + q(s)(ωi) log

p(ωi|xk)p(ωi|xk)
p(ωi) Pm
j=1

q(s)(ωj)
p(ωj) p(ωj|xk)

(21)
Where (19) comes from applying Bayes’ rule to p(xk|ωi), and (20) follows from substituting the deﬁnition of q(s)(ωi|xk)
from Eqn. 9.
We make two observations: ﬁrst, because xx > 0 for all x ≥0, the term log

p(ω|xk)p(ω|xk)
is always deﬁned. Second,
because log p(xk) does not depend on q(ωi), it disappears when optimizing Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) w.r.t q(ωi). If we assume, as
before, that p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i, we see that Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is deﬁned if and only if q(ωi) > 0 ∀i and Pm
j=1
q(s)(ωj)
p(ωj) p(ωj|xk)
∀k. The ﬁrst condition holds true when q(ω) ∈(Ω\∂Ω), and the second condition holds true for all q(s)(ω) ∈Ω. Thus, we
conclude that the domain of Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is (Ω\ ∂Ω)×Ω. As stated earlier, because Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is composed
of differentiable functions, it follows that Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is both continuous and differentiable over (Ω\ ∂Ω)×Ω.
H.4. Invoking Theorem 1 of Wu (1983) to Prove EM Converges to a Stationary Point of the Likelihood
We now show that EM converges to a stationary point of the log-likelihood. We will closely follow the derivation of Theorem
2 in Wu (1983), but modifying it so as not to assume that Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is deﬁned for all q(ω) ∈Ω. Our proof will
leverage Theorem 1 of Wu (1983), which is reproduced below for convenience:
Theorem 1 of Wu (1983): Let Ωdenote the domain of the likelihood function L(Φ), let S denote the set of stationary
points in the interior of Ω, and let {Φp} denote a sequence of Generalized EM (GEM) parameter updates generated by
Φp+1 ∈M(Φp). If (i) M is a closed point-to-set map over the complement of S and (ii) L(φp+1) > L(φ) for all φp /∈S .
Then all the limit points of {Φp} are stationary points of L, and L(Φp) converges monotonically to L∗= L(Φ∗) for some
Φ∗∈S .
■
To prove convergence to a stationary point, it sufﬁces to show that both (i) and (ii) of Theorem 1 apply to the case of domain
adaptation to label shift. We verify (i) and (ii) in turn below.
H.4.1. (I) OF THEOREM 1: M IS A CLOSED POINT-TO-SET MAP OVER THE COMPLEMENT OF S
We ﬁrst state what it means for M to be a closed point-to-set map. A map M from points of X to subsets of X is called
a point-to-set map on X. In our case, M is a point-to-point map (a special case of a point-to-set map) given by the EM
parameter update. A point-to-point map is said to be closed at x if xk →x, x ∈X and yk →y, yk = A(xk) implies
y = A(x). For a point-to-point map, continuity implies closedness. Because the complement of S corresponds to the
domain Ω\ S , if we show that M is continuous over the entirety of Ω, we would satisfy our conditions.
Referring to Eqn. 17, we see that M is deﬁned as:
M(q(s)(ω))i = 1
N
N
X
k=1
q(s)(ωi|xk)
= 1
N
N
X
k=1
q(s)(ωi)
p(ωi) p(ωi|xk)
Pm
j=1
q(s)(ωj)
p(ωj) p(ωj|xk)
Because M is composed of differentiable functions, to show continuity of M over Ωit sufﬁces to show that M(q(s)(ω))
is deﬁned for all q(s)(ω) ∈Ω. We observe that, given our assumption of p(ωi) ≥ϵ ∀i, the numerator q(s)(ωi)
p(ωi)
is
always deﬁned. In order for the denominator Pm
j=1
q(s)(ωj)
p(ωj) p(ωj|xk) to be deﬁned ∀k, we additionally require that
P
j q(s)(ωj)p(ωj|xk) > 0 ∀k. The latter condition is satisﬁed if q(s)(ω) ∈Ω. Thus, we conclude that M is continuous
over Ω, fulﬁlling (i) of Theorem 1 of Wu (1983).
■

--- Page 24 ---
Maximum Likelihood Label Shift with Bias-Corrected Calibration
H.4.2. (II) OF THEOREM 1: L(φp+1) > L(φ) FOR ALL φp /∈S
We ﬁrst show that ∂H(q(ω);q(s)(ω))
∂q(ω)
= 0 when q(ω) = q(s)(ω). For notational convenience, we will use D10H(a; b) and
D10Q(a; b) to denote ∂H(Φ1;Φ2)
∂Φ1
and ∂Q(Φ1;Φ2)
∂Φ1
at Φ1 = a and Φ2 = b, and will use DL(a) to denote ∂L(Φ)
∂Φ
at Φ = a.
In Sec. H.3, we established that Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is differentiable for all q(ω) ∈(Ω\ ∂Ω). Because H(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) :=
Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω))−L(q(ω)), it follows that H(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is also differentiable for all q(ω) ∈(Ω\∂Ω). In Sec. H.2.5,
we established that q(s)(ω) ∈(Ω\ ∂Ω) ∀s; thus, it follows that H(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is differentiable in the neighborhood of
q(s)(ω). Because q(ω) = q(s)(ω) maximizes H(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) (Eqn. 15), we conclude that D10H(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) = 0.
We now show that D10H(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) = 0 and q(s)(ω) /∈S implies Q(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω)) > Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)).
From the deﬁnition of H(q(s)(ω), q(s)(ω)), we have L(q(s)(ω)) = Q(q(s)(ω), q(s)(ω)) −H(q(s)(ω), q(s)(ω)). If
D10H(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) = 0 and q(s)(ω) /∈S , we have DL(q(s)(ω)) = D10Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) ̸= 0. Because
q(s)(ω) ∈(Ω\ ∂Ω) (Sec. H.2.5) and Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) is both deﬁned and differentiable ∀q(ω) ∈(Ω\ ∂Ω) (Sec. H.3),
we conclude that if D10Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) ̸= 0, then q(ω) = q(s)(ω) does not maximize Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)). Because
q(s+1)(ω) = arg maxq(ω) Q(q(ω), q(s)(ω)) by deﬁnition, we get Q(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω)) > Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) when
q(s)(ω) /∈S .
Finally, we show that if Q(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω)) > Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)), then L(q(s+1)(ω)) > L(q(s)(ω)). Analogous to
the derivation of Eqn. 16, we have:
L(q(s+1)(ω)) = Q(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω)) −H(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω)) (From the deﬁnition of H)
If Q(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω)) > Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)), we get:
L(q(s+1)(ω)) > Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) −H(q(s+1)(ω); q(s)(ω))
≥Q(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) −H(q(s)(ω); q(s)(ω)) (From Eqn. 15)
= L(q(s)(ω))
Thus, we have shown that L(q(s+1)(ω)) > L(q(s)(ω)) ∀q(s)(ω) /∈S , fulﬁlling (ii) of Theorem 1 of Wu (1983).
■
